Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Stein

U.S.A. Basketball plans to gauge the interest of the Duke University sensation Zion Williamson in joining the Americans’ 12-man squad for the FIBA World Cup in China this summer, according to a person familiar with U.S.A. Basketball’s intentions.

No discussions have taken place with Williamson, whose freshman season at Duke ended Sunday with a 68-67 quarterfinal loss against Michigan State in the N.C.A.A. tournament.

Formal talks with Williams, the presumptive No. 1 overall N.B.A. draft pick, would most likely not take place until Williams had officially declared his intention to turn professional and chosen an agent licensed by the N.B.A. to represent him, said the person, who was not authorized to speak publicly.

But the precedent for such an invitation was set by the current U.S.A. Basketball hierarchy in 2012, when Anthony Davis — fresh off being drafted No. 1 overall out of Kentucky by the New Orleans Pelicans — earned a roster spot with Team USA at the London Olympics under Duke Coach Mike Krzyzewski.

The 2019 World Cup, which runs Aug. 31 to Sept. 15 in China, will be the first major competition for the United States since Krzyzewski was succeeded as coach by Gregg Popovich of the San Antonio Spurs. Williamson is widely regarded as the rare sort of talent, like Davis before him, who would not be out of place with the N.B.A. All-Stars expected to fill out Popovich’s roster — no matter who is coaching.

The Athletic reported Monday that the Lakers’ LeBron James, a three-time Olympian, would not make himself available for the World Cup team this summer but that he had not ruled out playing for Team USA at the Tokyo Olympics in 2020.

There was some hope in international basketball circles that James would consider playing in the World Cup since the Lakers had missed the playoffs and James would sit out the N.B.A. postseason for the first time since 2004-05.

Jerry Colangelo, the chairman of U.S.A. Basketball, declined to discuss James or Williamson specifically when he was reached on Monday, saying only that roster invitations “will be addressed at the appropriate time.”



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

The real hoops drama is in Europe.

By Zach Messitte

Mr. Messitte is writing a book about Americans playing basketball in Italy.

MILAN — As the National Basketball Association plods its way to the 68th annual All-Star Game in Charlotte, N.C., on Sunday, American hoops fans should take note of how the Italians generate hardwood drama in February.

Since Thursday, the eight best teams in Italy’s Lega Basket Serie A from the first half of the season have been competing for the Coppa Italia, a no-holds-barred, single elimination tournament whose outcome actually matters to fans, players, team owners and corporate sponsors. And while a champion will be crowned at the end of the playoffs later this spring, bragging rights for holding the Coppa’s trophy aloft on Sunday provides a midseason shot of adrenaline.

The N.B.A.’s 82-game regular season, which began in October and will end in April, is a slog. Anyone who has watched a Wednesday night non-marquee matchup in November can attest to that. The action rarely begins before the fourth quarter; coaches rest their superstars.

The first half of the Italian season, by contrast, is an exciting sprint from the opening tipoff. The 16-team league has a 30-game regular season in which each club plays each other twice — once at each other’s home court. If you play in Venice in week one, Venice’s team comes to your arena in week 16. And there’s drama: Turin, seeded fifth in last year’s Coppa, won the trophy, even though they placed 11th at the end of the season.

There’s an intensity to the Italian regular season that too often is missing from the N.B.A.’s long fall and winter games. Not only are there fewer games, but also they are shorter and quicker (10- as opposed to 12-minute quarters and with fewer play stoppages mandated by television). And even if the quality of play in Italy is inferior, the interest in the February Coppa Italia far outstrips whether Team LeBron will prevail over Team Giannis at the N.B.A.’s All-Star Game.

“Whether it is game six or 26, you are always playing for something,” said Travis Diener, an American who also holds Italian citizenship and plays on this year’s fourth-seeded team from Cremona. “Then you get the Coppa and anything can happen.” Diener, who spent several years in the N.B.A., won the M.V.P. award of the Coppa Italia when he was playing for Sassari in Sardinia in 2014.

The Coppa allows teams from smaller markets (and smaller budgets) like Sassari and Cremona (more famous for Stradivarius violins than hoops) to pull off March Madness-like upsets against more glamorous squads like Milan, which is sponsored by Giorgio Armani and takes full advantage of the lack of a league salary cap.

In last year’s Coppa, Milan was one of three top seeds that lost in the first round, much to the delight of fans from smaller-market teams like Cantù, which plays in the Milanese suburb of Desio. As one team official told me, it doesn’t hurt that coaches have built-in salary incentives if their team does well at the midseason tournament — and sponsors, of course, love the positive brand attention of a winning squad.

The quarterfinal round began on Thursday and Friday, featuring a doubleheader each day: Milan-Bologna and Cremona-Varese on day one, and Venice-Sassari and Avellino-Brindisi on day two. American fans should try to imagine a similar midseason weekend tournament: What if the Bucks, Warriors, Raptors, Nuggets, Celtics, Pacers, Thunder and 76ers were playing in Charlotte this weekend for bragging rights to an American Basketball Cup? It would be a fresh take on a tired All-Star Game whose television ratings have declined by more than 50 percent since the Michael Jordan-dominated 1990s.

The Italian basketball league used to have its own all-star game, but there wasn’t enough sustained interest from players or fans, so it ended in 2016. A dunk contest was similarly discontinued. Giorgio Gandolfi, a former basketball journalist who now runs his own international sports agency and who has been to 13 N.B.A. All-Star Games, said that winning the Coppa Italia is second in prestige only to winning the league championship at the end of the season. He doesn’t miss Italy’s all-star games. “They were just kind of boring,” he said.

While there is too much money to be made for the N.B.A. — and team owners — to consider shortening the season from the grueling 82-game march to the playoffs, the idea of borrowing from the Italians to make each tipoff count more should be enticing.

Take the case of the New York Knicks, who currently hold the worst record in the N.B.A. There is nothing much left for the Knicks to play for or their fans to watch this season.

By contrast, Italian basketball teams near the bottom of the league run the risk of relegation to the second division, which is a bad result for everyone. That’s why the fight near the end of the season can be just as fierce at the bottom as it is as the top.

If the Knicks had to worry about being consigned to the minor leagues, the folks at Madison Square Garden might think differently about how to handle the final months of the season. If the Knicks were demoted to play against the Maine Red Claws, New York fans would probably have some choice words and creative hand gestures for their team’s poor management. Italian basketball fans would have some advice on how to do that better, too.

Zach Messitte, the president of Ripon College in Wisconsin, is on sabbatical as an associate fellow at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies in Bologna. 

The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

Although noting "regrets" that LSU men's basketball coach Will Wade didn't comply with the school several weeks ago when asked about recruiting issues, athletic director Joe Alleva announced in a statement Sunday that Wade's month-plus suspension has been lifted.

The university suspended Wade on March 8 because it said he refused to meet with school officials amid scrutiny of a reported FBI wiretap capturing the coach talking about an offer to then-recruit Javonte Smart. Wade missed the Tigers' final regular-season game and all of their SEC and NCAA Tournament games.

Assistant coach Tony Benford took over as head coach and led LSU to the SEC regular-season title with a win over Vanderbilt in his first game, then led the Tigers to the Sweet 16, where they lost to Michigan State.

Wade was reinstated after he met with Alleva and NCAA compliance officials on Friday, Alleva said in the statement, adding that he saw no place where Wade violated his contract, allowing for his reinstatement.

"During those meetings, he answered all questions and denied any wrongdoing in connection with recently reported allegations of irregularities in college basketball recruiting," Alleva said.

The statement also said the university "regrets that Coach Wade did not choose to fulfill his obligations to LSU when he was first asked to do so. However, the seriousness of the allegations and Coach Wade's prior refusal to refute them could not be ignored without exposing the University and basketball program to great risk. Protecting LSU and preserving our integrity must always be our first priority. Coach Wade's explanations and clarifications offered during the meeting, absent actual evidence of misconduct, satisfy his contractual obligation to LSU."

The alleged offer to Smart arose in a conversation Wade was having with Christian Dawkins, described as a middleman in the scandal of paying basketball recruits. Dawkins was convicted on felony charges of wire fraud last year and sentenced last month to six months in prison. The specifics of that case were unrelated to Dawkins' reported interaction with Wade.

ESPN and Yahoo Sports reported last month that a wiretap caught Wade upset about not landing Smart at that point despite a "strong-ass offer." CBS Sports described Smart as a top-50 recruit from Baton Rouge. He ultimately signed with the Tigers.

"I was thinking last night on this Smart thing," Wade reportedly said to Dawkins on the wiretap. "I'll be honest with you, I'm (expletive) tired of dealing with the thing. Like I'm just (expletive) sick of dealing with the (expletive). Like, this should not be that (expletive) complicated."

--Field Level Media

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Victor Mather

As the crowd filed out of the Barclays Center in May 2015, there was reason for hope. Though the Nets had just been eliminated by the Atlanta Hawks in the first round of the playoffs, they had overachieved and shown some promise for the future. And Phil Jackson had become the Knicks president the year before, bringing his triangle offense and a coaching résumé that included 11 N.B.A. titles to Manhattan.

Little did New York fans know that it would be four dreadful years before playoff basketball would return to the city. It finally will on Thursday night, when the Nets host the Philadelphia 76ers in a series tied at one all.

While there has been no playoff basketball in the city in the interim, much has happened in those four years. And for Knicks and Nets fans, not much of it has been good.

May 1, 2015 The eighth-seeded Nets fall to the top-seeded Hawks, 111-87. But they take two games in the series, raising optimism. “We were able to secure a playoff spot,” Coach Lionel Hollins says. “Some people will say, ‘Hey, we didn’t deserve it.’ That’s their problem.”

June 25 After putting up a 17-65 record, the worst in franchise history and the league’s second worst in 2015, the Knicks have bad luck in the draft lottery, ending up at the No. 4 spot. Nevertheless, their selection, Kristaps Porzingis of Latvia, will pay off, quickly becoming a star and a fan favorite.

Oct. 3 Knicks Coach Derek Fisher gets into a physical altercation after being confronted by Matt Barnes of the Memphis Grizzlies at the home of Barnes’s estranged wife. Barnes is suspended for two games.

Dec. 30 Cleanthony Early of the Knicks is shot in the knee by masked men and robbed of gold teeth caps after a visit to a strip club.

Jan. 10, 2016 The Nets fire Coach Hollins and demote General Manager Billy King with the team at 10-27. “Frankly speaking, I deserve a championship now much more than six years ago,”  owner Mikhail D. Prokhorov says.

Feb. 8 The Knicks, 23-31, fire Fisher. “There’s not a whole lot to say,” Jackson says in his first remarks to reporters since the start of training camp.

April 13 The Nets finish the season 21-61, the league’s third worst record. But there will be little help on draft day: They traded their top pick to the Celtics in 2014 for a 37-year-old Kevin Garnett and a 36-year-old Paul Pierce, both of whom are gone at this point.

The Knicks finish 32-50. That’s a 15-game improvement, but Jackson says, “We’re disappointed about our season.”

April 17 The Nets hire Kenny Atkinson, a Hawks assistant, as head coach. “Together, we can do great things,” Prokhorov says.

June 2 The Knicks hire Jeff Hornacek as coach, bypassing the interim coach, Kurt Rambis.

June 22 The Knicks trade for Derrick Rose, who proclaims them a “superteam.” After a year he will leave for the Cleveland Cavaliers.

July 7 The Nets sign Jeremy Lin, perhaps hoping to recapture the Linsanity that took over the Knicks in 2012.

July 8 The Knicks sign Joakim Noah for four years and $72 million. This will not work out. Noah will be suspended for 20 games for a drug violation, be sent to the developmental league and get into a shouting match with Hornacek. The Knicks wind up releasing him in 2018 and paying him anyway.

Feb. 8, 2017 The Knicks legend Charles Oakley is ejected from Madison Square Garden during a game. The crowd sides with the former player, chanting “Oakley, Oakley.” The Knicks say he behaved abusively, and the owner, James L. Dolan, says that Oakley “may have a problem with alcohol.” Oakley sues, claiming defamation and battery.

March 12 Carmelo Anthony gets his 10,000th point as a Knick, becoming the third player to reach that mark with two teams.

April 12 The Nets finish 20-62, the worst record in the league. Once again a potentially high draft pick is gone, as part of the Garnett deal. The Knicks are 31-51.

June 22 The Nets trade their longtime star Brook Lopez to the Los Angeles Lakers for D’Angelo Russell and Timofey Mozgov. Russell will become a key player in the team’s resurgence.

June 28 The Knicks and Phil Jackson agree to part ways after three years. The Knicks never fully embraced his triangle offense, and Jackson remained wary of the 3-point shot as it became increasingly important in the league. He also could never seem to get rid of Anthony, the team’s aging star who refused to waive a no-trade clause. Jackson also feuded with the player expected to be the team’s future, Porzingis.

Sept. 25 A trade is finally worked out for Anthony, who is sent to the Oklahoma City Thunder for Enes Kanter. He gave the Knicks seven seasons of 20-points-a-game play. Jackson was willing “to trade me for a bag of chips,” Anthony says. He also notes that under new management, “They went from asking for peanuts to asking for steak.”

Oct. 18 Lin ruptures a knee tendon  in the Nets’ opening game and misses the entire season.

Feb. 6, 2018 Porzingis tears the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee and is out for the rest of this season and the next one.

April 11 The Nets finish 28-54. Incredibly, for a third straight year they do not have their top pick because of that Garnett deal. (Garnett is by now 41 and has been out of the league two years.) The lost picks turned into Jaylen Brown, a big part of the contending Celtics; Markelle Fultz, a No. 1 overall choice; and Collin Sexton, who averaged 17 points as a rookie with the Cleveland Cavaliers.

The Knicks wind up 29-53 and fire Hornacek the next day. David Fizdale will be the new coach.

Asked how the Knicks can improve, the superfan Spike Lee can only turn to prayer: “On bended knee I pray above to da basketball gods to deliver us back to da glory years of da Orange and Blue. Amen,” he writes in The New York Times.

June 20 The Nets make a trade to get Dwight Howard from the Hornets, but Howard buys his way out of his contract and never plays for them.

July 13 The Nets trade Lin to the Hawks, curing the city’s second, significantly milder case of Linsanity.

Jan. 31, 2019 The Knicks  send their most popular player, Porzingis, who is still recovering from the torn A.C.L., to the Dallas Mavericks in a blockbuster trade. Two months later it will be revealed that he is under investigation by the New York Police Department after being accused of sexual assault.

The Knicks get Dennis Smith Jr. and some expiring contracts, which should open up salary cap space so they can sign some marquee free agents. Assuming that marquee free agents would want to play for the Knicks.

March 12 Knicks fans hoping for a change in ownership are disappointed when Dolan proclaims that he will not sell the team, even for $6 billion. Two days before that, he was filmed threatening a fan with banishment from the Garden after the fan had urged him to sell the team.

April 10 The Knicks have sunk to the bottom of the league again, finishing 17-65 and tying the franchise-worst mark. The Nets start the season 8-18, but then unexpectedly turn things around behind Russell, Spencer Dinwiddie (picked up from the developmental league in 2016) and Jarrett Allen (a No. 22 pick in 2017). They finish 42-40. Playoff basketball returns to New York. For now.

An earlier version of this article misstated the Knicks’ record in the 2014-15 season. They were 17-65, not 17-63.

Benjamin Hoffman contributed reporting.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

NEW YORK — Megan Gustafson of Iowa has won the Honda Sports Award as the top woman in college basketball.

Gustafson led Division I women's basketball with an average of 28 points this season. She owns Iowa records for most career points (2,804) and rebounds (1,460).

The 6-foot-3 center from Port Wing, Wisconsin, had 33 double-doubles in her senior season, tying an NCAA record. She led the Hawkeyes to the school's first Elite Eight in 26 years and earned AP Player of the Year honors.

The other finalists were Asia Durr (Louisville), Sabrina Ionescu (Oregon) and Teaira McCowan (Mississippi State).

Gustafson becomes eligible for Collegiate Woman Athlete of the Year, which will be awarded June 24 on CBS Sports Network in Los Angeles.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

OAKLAND, Calif. — The Golden State Warriors run a practice drill that Coach Steve Kerr did not intend as a tribute, even if he named it after someone who taught him a great deal. He calls it the “Lute Olson drill,” and it is a blur of activity: a 3-on-2 exercise that Kerr uses to get his players up and down the court.

“It’s a good way to get a little running and rhythm and shooting,” he said.

The Warriors, who are pretty good at those things, have elevated basketball into modern art in recent seasons. But Kerr, as he helps define basketball’s present, cannot help but dip into his past. He learned that drill in 1983, when he was a freshman guard at the University of Arizona playing for Olson, who was in the early stages of building a college powerhouse. Kerr, ever the student, was already absorbing as much as he could.

Olson, 84, retired as the men’s basketball coach at Arizona in 2008, but his influence resonates. Not so much, oddly enough, at the college level, where, of late, Arizona has had its well-publicized struggles along with the rest of the Pac-12 Conference. Instead, Olson’s impact exists largely in the N.B.A. — and with the Warriors, in particular.

Bruce Fraser, one of Kerr’s longtime assistants, played for Olson in the 1980s before working under him as a graduate assistant. And Andre Iguodala, the veteran Warriors forward, played at Arizona from 2002 to 2004, when he sought to emulate an older teammate named Luke Walton.

“All the fundamentals,” Iguodala said. “Things like footwork, body positioning and just being a smart player.”

Walton, who now has the thankless task of coaching the Los Angeles Lakers, is still considered a member of the Warriors’ extended family after serving as one of Kerr’s assistants for two seasons. Before Walton joined the Warriors in 2014, Kerr did not know him well. But Olson recommended him, and that was more than enough.

“If you came out of Arizona during that era, you knew how to play the game,” Fraser said. “And that was mostly because of Lute.”

Olson, who has had health issues in recent years, emphasized basketball basics. Each practice began with a series of chest passes. Players worked on their weak hands. The Warriors, who warm up by launching half-court heaves, are slightly less regimented.

“If Coach Olson walked in and saw some of this, he’d be shaking his head,” Fraser said. “He’d think we’re so loose.”

The Warriors are still mindful of the essentials, though, especially at training camp, where they dribble around traffic cones and throw passes at pitch-back nets configured with targets. If they channel the Harlem Globetrotters, their flamboyance is rooted in bedrock principles.

“And I think you could tie a lot of that back to Coach Olson and Arizona,” Fraser said.

Kerr played for several legendary N.B.A. coaches — Phil Jackson, Gregg Popovich, Lenny Wilkens, Cotton Fitzsimmons — and he took pieces from each as he developed his own style. Jerry Marvin, his former coach at Palisades High School in Los Angeles, made a big impression, too. But these were coaches with unique approaches.

“I think the common thread is their force of personality,” Kerr said. “They all saw the game a little differently and ran different stuff, basing a lot of it on their personnel. But it’s not what made them great coaches. It was having great talent, and then developing a great culture and system so that their talent could flourish.”

Olson, for example, adapted to the strengths of his roster. He became more guard-oriented over the years, especially after he recruited high-profile players like Damon Stoudamire, Khalid Reeves and Gilbert Arenas. (Kerr noted how he had been one of the “slow guys in the backcourt” when Olson was just starting out at Arizona.)

But Olson was not necessarily trying to outwit anyone by being especially innovative. Basketball, Kerr said, is not like football, where a mastermind like Bill Belichick can lean on his tactical genius to mold the New England Patriots into the most dominant N.F.L. team of his era.

“Football is so strategic,” Kerr said. “But in basketball, there aren’t many guys I can think of historically who are the best coaches on earth who were just offensive wizards or defensive wizards. It was more about the culture they built and the way their teams played together — not a style or a system.”

It has become a hackneyed concept in sports, as if teams can just crack the code on demand, but Olson was all about culture, his former players say. Jason Terry, a retired N.B.A. guard who played at Arizona from 1995 to 1999, recalled his recruitment. He was not a shy young man, but Olson, at that point firmly established as one of the game’s top coaches, had the sort of gravitas that intimidated him.

On the second day of Terry’s official visit to Arizona, Olson and his wife, Bobbi, had him over for pancakes.

“These unbelievable pancakes,” Terry, an analyst for Turner Sports, said in a telephone interview. “That was a big part of the recruitment. But I also remember that he kind of came over and put his big paw on my shoulder, and I jumped. He was like, ‘Nothing to be scared of young fella. It’s great to have you in my home.’ And from that point on, you were just at ease.”

Olson, Terry said, was the first coach he had who never used profanity. Olson would glare. His face would go red. And those big paws would shake.

“But he would never yell,” Terry said. “He would just say your name over and over and over.”

Above all, Olson imbued his players with the sense that they were a part of something larger than themselves. Before the national championship game in 1997, two prominent alumni — Kerr and Sean Elliott, both of whom had graduated to the N.B.A. — boarded the team bus. Olson had invited them to address his players, and their message was simple: Do it for all of us who have come before you but could never quite get the job done.

Terry saw that Olson had tears in his eyes. Arizona went on to win its first national title by defeating Kentucky in overtime.

“We knew that we couldn’t let him down,” Terry said.

With the Warriors, Kerr definitely swears on occasion. (Ask Draymond Green.) And the N.B.A. is not college basketball. But Kerr still tries to foster an atmosphere that is more about the collective whole than about its supremely talented parts. Kerr loathes isolation sets. He celebrates ball movement. And he stages team dinners on road trips, where family members are welcome.

As for the Pac-12, these are rough days. Arizona, under Coach Sean Miller, has been entwined in a corruption scandal, and the conference could send just one team to the N.C.A.A. tournament. Iguodala described the Pac-12 as garbage (he used a more colorful word), though he expressed hope moving forward. Kerr was more diplomatic.

“It’s been a dry spell,” he said. “And I really don’t know the answer.”

In fact, the Pac-12 has not won a national championship since Kerr boarded the Arizona team bus back in 1997 and delivered his pregame pep talk. But in his own way, as the Warriors chase another title, he is still carrying the mantle for the conference and his old coach.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Stein and Sopan Deb

It is one of the oldest warnings in sports: Great athletes, they say, don’t often become great coaches.

In the case of Magic Johnson, the legendary former Los Angeles Lakers point guard, that maxim must be amended. For Johnson, neither the front office nor the bench proved to be a winning or even comfortable habitat like the hardwood he used as a launching pad to basketball immortality.

Johnson’s forgettable coaching career with the Lakers lasted just 16 games at the close of the 1993-94 season before he unhappily vowed never to return to that occupation. Then this week, Johnson’s two-year reign as the Lakers’ president of basketball operations ended even more ignominiously.

He abruptly announced his resignation before the team’s final game of an enormously disappointing season, then revealed that he had told the news media of the decision before he had informed his boss, Jeanie Buss, in order to deny Buss an opportunity to talk him out of it.

Johnson, of course, has stunned the world before, with his announcement and early retirement in 1991 because he was found to be H.I.V. positive, followed by his brief return to basketball in 1996. He spent the ensuing two decades constructing a business and entertainment empire replete with a highly successful chain of movie theaters and an ownership stake in the storied Los Angeles Dodgers. But Johnson always insisted that he was, first and foremost, a Laker.

Handling his exit in such a haphazard manner has earned Johnson untold amounts of criticism in the days since, given how much the Lakers mean to Southern Californians and how unexpected this news was. Yet he seems prepared to take the hits in exchange for the opportunity to return to his more customary post-playing life “on the other side,” as he described it — forever a Laker but officially unattached to any team.

“I like to be free,” Johnson said.

But his freedom comes at a steep cost — to Johnson, to the Lakers, to a Hollywood belief in, well, magic.

It turns out Magic Johnson, who piloted some of the greatest teams in N.B.A. history, will not be the savior who helps the Lakers escape their longest run of futility.

After last summer’s blockbuster signing of LeBron James, Johnson proclaimed the Lakers to be “back” — with the promise of a return to full “back back” status this summer once they acquired at least one superstar sidekick to James. Johnson has instead fled just when the most crucial work was about to commence, with no clear path to bringing that second star to a flailing franchise that last reached the playoffs in 2013 and last won a championship in 2010.

When he convened an impromptu news conference Tuesday night, rather than reveal his updated plan to restore the Lakers to title contention and placate a frustrated fan base, Johnson did just the opposite. Describing himself as “happier when I wasn’t the president,” he explained that the conditions and pressures attached to building a championship team around James meant that the real Magic “couldn’t come out.”

In a series of rambling interviews with a number of news outlets while the Lakers were in the process of losing their regular-season finale to the Portland Trail Blazers, Johnson spoke of how he had longed to send a congratulatory tweet to Oklahoma City’s Russell Westbrook or to tutor Ben Simmons, the rising Philadelphia 76ers star, without inciting a storm of tampering allegations.

“I knew if I stayed in the role,” he said, “I’m giving up a lot of me.”

Such disclosures, of course, only served to validate much of the skepticism that greeted Buss’s decision to install Johnson as the new face of the Lakers’ basketball operations in February 2017.

Rival front-office executives questioned Johnson’s lack of experience in the modern game and his willingness to embrace the all-encompassing nature of the job from the moment he was named to replace the much-maligned Jim Buss (Jeanie’s brother) and Mitch Kupchak, the longtime Lakers executive. Those questions only rose in volume when Buss named as Magic’s sidekick another front-office neophyte, Rob Pelinka, Kobe Bryant’s polarizing former agent.

There were red flags from the start. In taking on his first active role with an N.B.A. team since his second retirement as a player in 1996, Johnson admitted that he had much to learn about navigating the ins and outs of the N.B.A.’s complex salary cap and the rhythms of a job that had evolved so much in his time away.

“The main part for me is really learning the other part that I didn’t know, and that is to understand the C.B.A., the salary cap, where we are in terms of the salary cap and who’s a free-agent-to-be,” Johnson told USA Today of the challenges he faced in building a roster and understanding the collective bargaining agreement.

Part of the issue might have been that Johnson could never just be a basketball executive. He is a mogul and a cultural force. While other N.B.A. teams primarily lean on decision makers focusing solely on basketball, Johnson seemed to always have his eye on something bigger than the game itself — reaching with his business tentacles to as many corners as possible.

Johnson acquired a 4.5 percent share of the Lakers in 1994 before selling his stake in 2010. He even once hosted a syndicated late-night talk show, 1998’s “The Magic Hour.” And he was never just about one game either, acquiring a minority stake in the Dodgers in 2012 and one in the Los Angeles Football Club of Major League Soccer in 2014.

Business had clearly been on Johnson’s mind when he took the Lakers’ front-office job in 2017. He told “CBS This Morning” in an interview at the time that he had turned down other offers to run a franchise, including the embattled Knicks, but that he felt it was the right time to rejoin the Lakers.

“At this point in my life, you know, I think that I can do it right now because my businesses are running smooth,” Johnson said. “I can turn them over to my executive team that I have.” In that same interview, he said, “I always wanted to be the male Oprah.”

Johnson was one of the first athletes to build an empire for himself outside professional sports. He went from whipping behind-the-back passes and being the engine that made the 1980s Showtime Lakers rev to investing in more than 100 Starbucks and Burger King locations, among many other business investments, all while flashing his famed charismatic grin. According to a Basketball Reference estimate, Johnson made about $23 million from N.B.A. salary alone, not including endorsements. Now his net worth is in the hundreds of millions.

The business of reviving the Lakers, however, proved beyond him. Buss, as a result, is already facing pressure to rebound from her nostalgic faith in Johnson to pursue a more accomplished executive this time — such as Golden State’s Bob Myers or San Antonio’s R. C. Buford — to plot the team’s recovery from a season soaked in drama and dysfunction.

Bizarre as the timing seemed, Johnson insisted to reporters that there were no hidden reasons for leaving other than the desire, as he put it to ESPN’s Rachel Nichols, to stop “letting myself down by not being Magic Johnson.”

What’s clear is that walking away when he did spared him from firing Coach Luke Walton — something Walton and his assistant coaches, according to two people with knowledge of the situation who were not authorized to discuss it publicly, had been bracing for this week. Walton’s culpability for the Lakers’ 37-45 record is a matter of debate, given all of this season’s injuries, but Johnson’s desire to make a change had been widely anticipated in league circles for weeks, if not months. Buss’s well-chronicled fondness for Walton is thought to be the only thing that had kept him in place throughout Johnson’s reign.

“I would have to affect someone’s livelihood and their life,” Johnson told reporters Tuesday night, seemingly confirming that he was poised to fire Walton. “And I thought about that. That’s not fun for me. That’s not who I am.”

There had never been a player like Johnson before he was drafted out of Michigan State as the first pick in the 1979 N.B.A. draft. His court vision, quickness, length and versatility made him a dominant presence and led to his winning three Most Valuable Player Awards and five N.B.A. championships. He became perhaps the defining face of what it means to be a Laker — no easy feat given the deep well of great players who have worn their familiar purple-and-gold jersey.

But the fact that Buss has yet to address the news media, beyond a brief statement insisting that the organization still believed “there is no greater Los Angeles Laker than Earvin Johnson,” speaks to the team’s level of shock that he would step down without warning.

At a speaking engagement at Chapman University on April 3, Buss acknowledged that the Lakers “haven’t lived up to the brand my father created,” referring to one of the most successful owners in the history of American team sports: Jerry Buss. The signing of James in free agency last summer — for which Johnson is sometimes subjected to claims that his “closer” role was overstated — could not prevent the Lakers from extending their playoff drought to a franchise-worst sixth consecutive season. That figure matches the Knicks for the league’s third-longest active drought behind Sacramento (13 seasons) and Phoenix (nine).

Now, the onus falls squarely on Buss to find a successor to repair a roster in need of overhaul.

To Johnson’s relief, such issues are no longer his concern. He returns now to a world he may have felt increasingly more comfortable with anyway in recent years: the one outside basketball. As he told The Los Angeles Times in 2008, Johnson hoped to go down in history as a better businessman than an athlete.

“That’s my dream,” Johnson said. “And I’m going after it each and every day.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

PADUCAH, Ky. — Authorities say a Michigan youth basketball coach accused of punching a Kentucky referee, knocking him unconscious, has been charged with assault.

News outlets cite a statement from the McCracken County sheriff's office in Kentucky that says 40-year-old Keyon Menifield of Flint, Michigan, had a disagreement Saturday with the referee, 61-year-old Kenny Culp of Paducah. The statement says Culp turned to walk away when Menifield struck him.

Culp was taken to a hospital for treatment, and deputies charged Menifield with assault of a sports official. It wasn't immediately clear whether he has an attorney.

Culp's niece, KaSondra Barnett, said on Sunday that he was being treated for a broken collarbone, a crack in his sinus cavity, and a concussion.

McCracken County Sheriff Matt Carter says the investigation is ongoing.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Scott Cacciola and Marc Tracy

LOS ANGELES — The criminal case involving one of President Trump’s leading adversaries and the world’s biggest shoe company has also ensnared an unlikely figure from the youth basketball world.

The coach, Gary Franklin Sr., started his club from scratch in Los Angeles and ran a program known for its rectitude, according to Sonny Vaccaro, the former Nike and Adidas executive who essentially forged the relationship between the shoe industry and the summer youth basketball circuit. What began as a team for Franklin to coach his then 10-year-old son became a powerhouse club that attracted future N.B.A. stars and major college recruits, and one that steered clear of any scandals.

“He was one of the guys who built it up through his own resources, and his program had a reputation as one of the ‘good guys,’” Vaccaro said of Franklin in an interview this week.

Franklin’s club, California Supreme, and others like it are major participants in a system involving youth basketball, shoe companies and colleges that supplies the professional game with a deep reservoir of talent. And Michael Avenatti knew it.

Now Franklin has become a central figure in the case against Avenatti, the lawyer best known for representing Stormy Daniels, the adult film star, in her lawsuit against President Trump. Whether Franklin, who has not been charged, is an accomplice, a co-conspirator or simply collateral damage is not yet clear, but prosecutors’ revelations about his involvement have stunned those who have known him for years.

The question in the club basketball world is, could Franklin have morphed from a stickler who played by the rules into the latest symbol of an amateur basketball world that has spun out of control?

“Cal Supreme was always the best team for doing things by the book, because there were a lot of other teams that didn’t do it by the book,” said Andy Brown, a former forward for Cal Supreme who went on to play at Stanford. “And Cal Supreme did it by the book.”

California Supreme reached its zenith at the 2016 Peach Jam, a summertime showcase for the best travel basketball teams and players in the country. In the final event of the Nike-sponsored league, Deandre Ayton, a towering Bahamian who was about to turn 18, helped the team reel off a huge winning streak before Cal Supreme fell to the eventual champions.

For Franklin, a soft-spoken coach from Los Angeles, the run was a triumph. His Nike-sponsored team was one of the best in the country in what is now known as grass-roots basketball.

Three years later, Franklin, 51, is in a different spotlight, with federal prosecutors accusing Avenatti of extortion for threatening Nike with the release of information that Avenatti had pledged would damage the company’s stock-market value to the tune of a few billion dollars. Specifically, Avenatti had told Nike lawyers this month that a coach in Nike’s grass-roots basketball league had approached him with information that company employees had paid the families of three players, prosecutors said. Avenatti, prosecutors said, demanded that Nike pay millions to make the whole thing go away.

Paying players and their families would violate N.C.A.A. rules, rendering the players ineligible for college play. Also, if the money was paid in exchange for players to commit to colleges Nike sponsors, it would resemble the behavior that recently led to federal fraud convictions for two former Adidas employees.

Two people familiar with the investigation confirmed that the unidentified coach in the complaint is Franklin. Nike had recently declined to renew its sponsorship deal with Cal Supreme, which was worth more than $70,000 annually. Franklin could not be reached for comment.

Grass-roots basketball is often erroneously called A.A.U. basketball, even in prosecutors’ court filings. That is a misnomer because the elite leagues are not sponsored by the Amateur Athletic Union. Rather, they are supported by sneaker companies that spend hundreds of thousands of dollars every year to organize tournaments from April through July. The teenage players who participate are outfitted, from head to toe, in apparel made by and bearing the logo of the league’s sponsor.

Sneaker companies like Nike and Adidas also pay thousands of dollars each year to sponsor the teams themselves as a sort of long-term investment strategy: They hope to build brand loyalty among young players who could eventually become stars. Get players into your gear early, the thinking goes, and you may be more likely to land them as spokesmen when they turn pro and have even more influence over the world’s fans — and their wallets.

“Sneaker companies want to make money,” said Dr. Todd Boyd, a professor at the University of Southern California who was the executive producer of a 2016 documentary, “At All Costs: Life Inside A.A.U. Basketball.” “That’s their objective. And if you have a kid who’s good enough to go on to the N.B.A., and he chooses to continue wearing these shoes, you’ve made a long-term investment that could pay off for years.”

At the same time, the grass-roots basketball landscape has shifted in recent years as N.B.A. players like Bradley Beal, Chris Paul and Carmelo Anthony have increasingly become involved in forming their own teams. These are players who already have partnerships with shoe companies and can help subsidize costs on their own. Last year, Russell Westbrook of the Oklahoma City Thunder, who has an endorsement deal with Nike’s Jordan brand, organized a Los Angeles-based team that advanced to the playoffs at the Peach Jam.

Franklin was far from the N.B.A. when he started his team.

A flattering portrait of Franklin is included in “Play Their Hearts Out,” a 2010 book by George Dohrmann that details youth basketball culture in Southern California. Franklin, according to the book, played basketball and football at Los Angeles Valley College. Later, he doted on his son, Gary Jr., creating a club team he initially called the Runnin’ Rebels. He preached fundamentals during their practices at Manual Arts High School and spoke openly about his faith in God. Gary Franklin Jr. went on to play college basketball at Baylor.

Cal Supreme did not have lavish resources. When Brown, the Stanford player, was with the team, it practiced at various Los Angeles-area high schools. Parents subsidized costs. And players paid for their own meals at tournaments.

Yet neither Brown nor his teammates were naïve about the world they inhabited.

“Everybody who played knew what was going on,” Brown said. “We all knew people who were getting paid, we all knew people who were getting free stuff — we all knew it. Now, it’s all coming out. So it’s shocking, but it’s not shocking, because we all knew it was happening.”

For years, the sponsorship deals have been heavily dependent on grass-roots coaches’ attracting the best players to their programs. Cal Supreme appeared to have enough talent over the years to keep Nike interested, producing players who ultimately landed at major college programs like Southern California, Oregon and Arizona, along with several who went to the N.B.A.

Big names circled in Cal Supreme’s orbit. Miles Simon, a guard who had won an N.C.A.A. championship while playing at Arizona, was one of the program’s coaches from 2011 to 2014. (Simon, who now works as an assistant for the Lakers, declined to comment through a Lakers spokeswoman.) Shareef O’Neal, a top-tier recruit and the son of Shaquille O’Neal, played for Cal Supreme before going to U.C.L.A. More recently, Percy Miller, the businessman and rapper known as Master P, was listed on Cal Supreme’s website as a team partner.

Ayton, who spent a season at Arizona before the Phoenix Suns made him the top overall pick in the 2018 N.B.A. draft, was Cal Supreme’s highest-profile player. But in a twist, after years of wearing Nikes, Ayton signed a lucrative deal to wear Pumas when he went to the N.B.A. For Nike, it was an investment that did not pay off.

It remains unclear whether Ayton’s deal played any role in Nike’s decision not to extend its sponsorship deal with Cal Supreme.

Cassius Stanley, a top-30 recruit and a senior at Sierra Canyon High School outside Los Angeles, played for Cal Supreme in 2016 and for Westbrook’s team in 2018. His father, Jerome Stanley, who works as a lawyer, said that as far as he knew, Nike had never provided Cal Supreme players or their family members with benefits that would violate N.C.A.A. rules.

“It is very sad that Coach Gary has gotten himself tangled up in this mess,” Stanley said. “I feel bad for him and his family, and I pray that he and his lawyers can help him move on and not be damaged or used any more than he has been the past few days.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

LOS ANGELES — Zion Williamson of Duke insisted he doesn't know if he's going to declare for the NBA draft and leave Duke early.

Then his words seemingly betrayed him.

After winning the John R. Wooden Award as the nation's outstanding men's player at the College Basketball Awards Friday night, he rattled off memories from his freshman year.

"Just being around each other on and off the court because it was more than basketball," Williamson said during the nationally televised show. "The brotherhood is something real. The bond we had built is second to none so I know I'm going to miss that."

Oops.

Asked for the second time on the show if he was leaving early, he replied, "Like I said before, I don't know."

Williamson is the sixth player from Duke to win the award named for the late UCLA coach, who won a record 10 NCAA championships.

Williamson's trophy cabinet is already overstuffed. He has collected numerous awards — including The Associated Press player of the year — for his efforts in leading the Blue Devils to the Elite Eight of the NCAA Tournament. They lost 68-67 to Michigan State, denying themselves a trip to the Final Four.

Earlier, Williamson won the Karl Malone power forward trophy.

"I don't regret nothing about this season," he said. "I enjoyed every moment of it."

Sabrina Ionescu of Oregon was a surprise winner of the women's Wooden Award. She and Williamson shared the spotlight during the fifth annual ceremony at The Novo in downtown Los Angeles.

Her mouth dropped open when her name was announced. The NCAA Division I leader in career triple-doubles with 18, she led the Ducks on their first-ever Final Four run. The 21-year-old point guard plans to return for her senior year.

"This award isn't won alone, so this goes out to my team, my family, my coaches, and everyone that made this possible," Ionescu said. "Growing up with two brothers, it wasn't easy. They never took it easy on me. We fought all the time. We played in the yard, and so this goes to them. They pushed me to my limits all the time."

Ionescu beat out Connecticut's Napheesa Collier, Asia Durr of Louisville, Iowa's Megan Gustafson and Teaira McCowan of Mississippi State.

Gustafson had earned several postseason honors, including AP player of the year for leading the nation in scoring for the second straight season.

Other winners were:

— RJ Barrett of Duke, Jerry West shooting guard award

— Rui Hachimura of Gonzaga, Julius Erving small forward award

— Ethan Happ of Wisconsin, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar center award

— Ja Morant of Murray State, Bob Cousy point guard award

All of the award namesakes were on hand to present their trophies except Cousy, who is 90.

Oklahoma coach Lon Kruger received the Wooden Legends of Coaching award from Steve Henson, his former player at Kansas State and current Texas-San Antonio coach.

Kruger is 160-105 in eight seasons with the Sooners. He's the first Division I coach to guide five different schools to the NCAA Tournament.

The individual awards were decided by a combination of fan votes and input from the Basketball Hall of Fame's selection committee.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Howard Megdal

When Breanna Stewart, the reigning W.N.B.A. most valuable player, was carried off the floor of the Euroleague championship game in Hungary last weekend with a ruptured Achilles’ tendon, her pain was not just her own.

“I love Stewie and was heartbroken to hear about her injury, especially coming off an unbelievable W.N.B.A. season and World Cup,” Elena Delle Donne, the Washington Mystics star and a former league most valuable player, said. “She’s just a great player, competitor and friend. She will be missed this year, but I know she will come back stronger than ever.”

Stewart is not only a beloved player for the Seattle Storm; she is also a prominent symbol of an enduring issue in professional women’s basketball in the United States: Its players’ seasons never end.

A rookie selected in this month’s W.N.B.A. draft will make $41,265 to $53,537 in base salary, and nobody in the league will earn a base salary of as much as $120,000 this coming season.

Because of that, many of the 144 players in the W.N.B.A. maximize their earning window by heading to Europe and Asia, where independent owners, free of salary caps, can offer them lucrative opportunities.

There is a price to pay, however: endless seasons bleeding into one another; a physical, psychological and emotional toll; and, the players say, a heightened risk of injury.

A few weeks ago, Victoria Vivians, a 2018 first-round pick of the Indiana Fever, tore her anterior cruciate ligament playing in Israel. She, like Stewart, will miss the 2019 W.N.B.A. season.

These were only the biggest, latest injuries. Consider one by Amanda Zahui B., the Liberty center, who plays for Sopron Basket in Hungary.

“I just twisted my ankle really bad,” she said in a phone interview in the past week. “It’s a swollen potato. But I got to practice through it. We don’t really have the time to take off. Everyone twists their ankles. Everyone gets bone bruises in their knees and such.”

All of which elevates the question of how much W.N.B.A. players are paid, and whether a framework can be established to keep more of them in the United States during the league’s off-season.

“I’ve always said, everybody that plays overseas in the W.N.B.A. needs therapy,” Mystics guard Kristi Toliver, who spent a decade on the hamster wheel of women’s professional basketball before being hired this off-season as an assistant coach for the N.B.A.’s Washington Wizards, said ahead of her 11th W.N.B.A. campaign. “It’s just a real thing — just so much that you go through with the travel and, being away from loved ones, family or significant others, and trying to manage and deal with all these different things that are coming at you.

“But you have a high-level job and you have to perform well in order to keep it.”

Ending the financial need for nonstop play is a prime focus of Terri Jackson, president of the Women’s National Basketball Players Association. It appears the league is supportive as well, which is not surprising, given that the quality of play would most likely rise and players who remained in their home market could promote their teams year-round.

“I think it’s a dream, a goal, of the union to grow the league to the point where players can work in it year-round and not have to endure the risks and the rigors of overseas play, of that 12-month calendar,” Jackson said. “It’s a matter that concerns me. It’s a matter that is top of mind for the executive committee and our larger C.B.A. committee.”

That focus is particularly important right now, after the players’ association opted out of its collective bargaining agreement with the league late last year. So the injury to Stewart, while reflecting a longstanding reality, has also shed new light on the way these players earn a living.

“First and foremost, our thoughts are with Breanna and we wish her a speedy recovery,” Mark Tatum, the acting W.N.B.A. president and N.B.A. deputy commissioner, said in an email. “The W.N.B.A. and its teams and players share a commitment to growing the league’s business and building on our ongoing work to provide greater professional opportunities for players in the off-season.”

The league has good reason to want a pathway to limiting, if not ending, overseas play from players: The teams are consistently affected by the toll it takes on its players.

“The year-round play for W.N.B.A. players is a detriment to the W.N.B.A. product,” Minnesota Lynx Coach Cheryl Reeve said. “The physical and mental toll it takes on the league’s elite players is reflected in some of the league’s best sitting out the W.N.B.A. season to ‘rest,’ as well as these players sustaining injuries.”

Reeve said the rest, which cuts into the W.N.B.A. season, is critical for elite players who “are asked to perform at their highest levels day in and day out at home and abroad.”

“It isn’t possible to sustain an elite level without these breaks,” she said.

The new way forward can take many forms, with changes in the base salary merely one of the tools available. Toliver, for instance, is coaching in the N.B.A. this season, but, because of restrictive rules in place from the previous C.B.A., is making just $10,000 to do so. A comprehensive pathway to getting W.N.B.A. players more opportunities on N.B.A. coaching staffs and in front offices during the W.N.B.A. off-season could significantly change the calculation for players by itself.

Jackson spoke optimistically about how that process was going, though even the work to keep her own side informed requires time-zone gymnastics with her leadership scattered all over the world.

“We could have a meeting at 10 a.m. or at 10 p.m., Eastern time, just because we have folks in, or we’ve had folks in, Russia and Poland and China, Turkey,” Jackson said. “And so my executive committee just says get it done, so that’s what we do.” She recalled an executive committee member, Nneka Ogwumike, jumping on a call from China at midnight.

The two sides have until the conclusion of the 2019 season to come to an agreement.

“The league has also signaled its willingness, its desire, to have a really collaborative relationship with the players, and to hear and to understand the concerns, and how to make this better,” Jackson said. “This is good forward movement. I think that’s where we are.”

That comes as welcome news to players like A’ja Wilson, who has followed Stewart’s path in many ways. Stewart was the top overall pick in 2016; Wilson in 2018. Like Stewart, Wilson won an N.C.A.A. championship, then was the W.N.B.A. rookie of the year. And like Stewart, Wilson went straight from college ball to the W.N.B.A. to a stint overseas last year, in China, before an injury ended her season.

“It’s definitely not an easy route at all,” Wilson said. “I think that’s what makes us just that elite as professional athletes. Because our bodies take on so much, but yet we still perform every single game. I mean, when Stewie got hurt she was in the championship game. She was playing at the highest level that she could overseas. It broke my heart.”

Wilson, too, expressed hope that Stewart’s injury would “shine a light” on this scheduling issue. Zahui B. agreed, though she doesn’t have much time to worry about it: Her team is in the Hungarian league semifinals. If her team sweeps, she said, she will finish her season on May 2, then fly home to Sweden to see her family on May 3, before reporting to New York for training camp with the Liberty by May 8. On May 9, she will be at Barclays Center for New York’s first preseason game, against the Chinese national team.

She said she was looking forward to playing in the best women’s professional league in the world. But as she attends to her aching ankle, she also echoed her fellow players on just how much better the league, and the professional experience, could be with some rest.

And Toliver, who has now lived it, knows firsthand how right they are.

“I feel that now, entering the summer, I’m going to be so much more prepared to do so much more,” Toliver said. “With what I was able to do with the off-season, I feel that the summer is going to be a breeze.”









Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

LOS ANGELES — Mick Cronin has been hired as UCLA's basketball coach, ending a months-long search to find a replacement for the fired Steve Alford.

The university says Cronin agreed to a $24 million, six-year deal Tuesday.

He leaves his alma mater Cincinnati after 16 seasons, having led the Bearcats to the NCAA Tournament in each of the last nine years.

The 47-year-old coach will be introduced at a campus news conference Wednesday.

Cronin's only other head coaching stint was at Murray State from 2003-06. He was associate head coach at Louisville from 2001-03 and worked as an assistant and video coordinator from 1996 to 2001 at Cincinnati.

Alford was fired on Dec. 31.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

TAMPA, Fla. — Baylor and Notre Dame capped the women's college basketball season with a thrilling championship game.

The sport now has had a different champion in the past four years with the Lady Bears edging the Irish 82-81 on Sunday night to win their third title. It's only the second time in the past two decades that there have been that many teams claiming the title.

"Just a great game for women's basketball," Baylor coach Kim Mulkey said.

The 11-point combined differential for the three games in the Final Four was the closest in the history of the tournament, topping last season's 15-point margin. More than 40,000 fans attended the Final Four games, which was the most since 2010. Overall, nearly 275,000 fans attended the entire tournament, which ranks eighth all-time, including 20,127 for the title game. It was the highest attendance in over 15 years for the NCAAs.

"We've had a really great championship. Our first- and second-round numbers is the best we've seen in 11 years," NCAA vice president for women's basketball Lynn Holzman said.

There were a number of competitive games in the entire tournament, including Sunday night's title tilt. During the regular season, the Top 25 was upset and three different teams held the No. 1 spot in the poll, including Baylor, which was the most since 2012.

While 12 of the 15 players on the AP All-American teams will not be returning, the future is still bright with plenty of star power coming back.

Oregon Ducks junior Sabrina Ionescu announced Saturday night that she was going to return for her senior season. She potentially could have gone to the WNBA this year.

Notre Dame guard Jackie Young hasn't revealed her intentions yet. Like Ionescu, the junior turns 22 this year which makes her eligible for the WNBA draft.

Baylor forward Lauren Cox will be back at some point next year. She injured her left knee in the title game in the third quarter. Mulkey made it sound like Cox could miss at least some of next season because of the injury.

"That kid, if she didn't get hurt, and she will be back, God works in mysterious ways, would have been the No. 1 probably pick in the draft next year," Mulkey said. "That kid probably would have been defensive player of the year nationally next year. That's how good she is. And she will be back, I promise you that. It may take her a year. We'll rest her, do whatever."

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

Mike Anderson was hired as the new men’s basketball coach at St. John’s on Friday after being fired at Arkansas last month.

Anderson, 59, takes over for the former St. John’s star Chris Mullin, who resigned on April 9, citing a “recent personal loss.” Mullin’s older brother, Roddy, died recently at 58 after having cancer for years.

Terms of Anderson’s contract were not disclosed. He also coached at Missouri and Alabama-Birmingham before leading the Razorbacks to five postseason appearances and a 169-102 record in eight seasons.

Anderson, a native of Birmingham, Ala., spent the first part of his career working for Nolan Richardson. Anderson played for Richardson at Tulsa before becoming an assistant under him there.

When Richardson left for Arkansas, Anderson joined him in Fayetteville. He was an assistant at Arkansas for 17 years, helping the Razorbacks win the 1995 national championship. Anderson is 369-200 in 17 seasons as a Division I coach and has never had a losing record.

He is known for coaching up-tempo teams that press on defense. Anderson said at a news conference that his goal was for St. John’s to play an exciting style of basketball, adding that the Red Storm would be “one of the top assist teams in the country” and “one of the top turnover teams in the country.”

Anderson said that he envisioned a team that was unpredictable.

“You don’t know what we’re going to do,” he said. “Our pressure may come from the half court. It may come full court. It may come from a zone. Now you’ve got to worry about what we’re doing. I don’t worry about what teams do. I worry more about what we’re doing.”

Mullin guided the Red Storm to the N.C.A.A. tournament this year for the only time in his four seasons as the coach. They were immediately eliminated by Arizona State in an opening-round game, and the program has not won in the tournament since 2000.

In the wake of Mullin’s departure, there was some criticism about the length of the hiring process, as certain top candidates withdrew from consideration.

Arizona State’s Bobby Hurley and Loyola-Chicago’s Porter Moser were initially targeted as replacements for Mullin but decided to stay at their universities. Iona Coach Tim Cluess said in a statement on Thursday that he had been contacted but was withdrawing his name from consideration.

The St. John’s athletic director, Mike Cragg, defended the process.

“I would say nine days is a pretty thorough and efficient search,” said Cragg, who came from Duke last fall.

Anderson said he had not spoken to Mullin about the state of the program, but planned to reach out to him. He will have plenty of work to do in order to build a strong Big East roster for next season. The junior guards Shamorie Ponds and Justin Simon have declared for the N.B.A. draft, and L. J. Figueroa and guard Bryan Trimble Jr. have reportedly placed their names in the transfer portal.

The new coach, who does not have ties to New York, said his plan was to recruit in the area.

“I had somebody ask me, ‘Who’s the guy who’s going to recruit for you?’ My staff’s going to recruit,” said Anderson, adding: “I think it comes down to building those relationships. I know that they’re going to see me. They’re going to get a chance to know me.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Alan Blinder and Marc Tracy

CHAPEL HILL, N.C. — The families of several University of North Carolina women’s basketball players complained last week of racially insensitive remarks by Sylvia Hatchell, the program’s Hall of Fame coach, who was subsequently put on leave, according to two people with direct knowledge of the allegations.

Hatchell’s lawyer, Wade M. Smith, said in an interview Thursday that his client was aware of the accusations that were described in detail by one of the people with direct knowledge. He said his client’s words had been misquoted or misconstrued.

The families detailed their concerns in a meeting that some U.N.C. officials attended in Chapel Hill while the athletic director, Bubba Cunningham, joined by video conference from another location, according to the person who described the meeting and spoke on the condition of anonymity out of fear of retaliation.

The meeting included accusations that Hatchell had warned that a loss to Louisville could lead to “nooses,” according to the person, and that the coach had once urged players to do a “tomahawk chop” war cry, a request the women resisted.

Within days of the meeting, the university, which has been in the midst of a reckoning over racism and Confederate history, announced that Hatchell and her three assistants would be put on paid administrative leave while an outside law firm conducted a review to “assess the culture of the women’s basketball program and the experience of our student-athletes.”

The announcement stunned North Carolina and appeared abrupt, but in the discussion with university officials on March 28, players’ relatives said Hatchell’s conduct had caused discomfort during at least two basketball seasons, according to the person.

The families also told university officials that Hatchell had complained that her team played like “old mules” during a game against Georgia Tech — a remark that some took as a reference to female slaves and that caused at least one player to cry, according to the person.

In another instance, according to the person, the families said that Hatchell had warned that if U.N.C. turned in a middling performance against Louisville, “nooses” would await.

“If you guys play this way against Louisville, they’re going to take y’all outside with some nooses,” Hatchell said, according to the person, who was told of the remark by people who were present.

The reference to “nooses,” the person said, led to two apologies from Hatchell, the second because players thought the first one had lacked sincerity. The players remained frustrated with their coach but elected to wait until the off-season to address their concerns.

Smith said the coach had used different words when warning about the coming Louisville game. “She said words like: ‘They’re going to hang us out to dry. They’re going to take a rope and hang us out to dry,’” the lawyer said.

Smith said his client “doesn’t have a racist bone in her body.”

Allegations of racism against Hatchell were first reported by The Washington Post.

Five days after U.N.C.’s season ended, with a 20-point loss to California in the opening round of the N.C.A.A. tournament, the families voiced their grievances in the meeting.

A North Carolina athletic department spokesman declined to comment. When the university announced the review on Monday, it said it was “committed to the well-being of our student-athletes and to ensuring that they have the best experience possible in and outside of competition.”

U.N.C. players either declined to comment or did not respond to messages. It was not clear which of the team’s players were represented when the relatives spoke with Cunningham and the other U.N.C. employees. No members of the coaching staff attended the meeting, which was organized after some players’ relatives held a conference call on March 25, the person said.

Smith said Thursday that the coach’s suggestion of the tomahawk chop, often seen at Florida State athletic events, was a motivational tool, and he said that Hatchell had often tried to commandeer the traditions of other schools to inspire her team.

The lawyer said that Hatchell had intended no offense in that episode and that she did not recall making any statements about “old mules.”

The person who described the allegations against Hatchell did not know of any specific accusations against the assistant coaches.

The North Carolina women’s basketball team has had great success under Hatchell, particularly in the 1990s and the 2000s. The Tar Heels won their sole national championship in 1994.

Hatchell, who recently completed her 33rd season at North Carolina, is one of a handful of college basketball coaches with more than 1,000 career wins, and she is a member of the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. In her first college coaching job, Hatchell oversaw the junior varsity team at Tennessee in the team’s first season under Pat Summitt, a trailblazing head coach.

But in this decade, North Carolina has only twice reached the second weekend of the N.C.A.A. tournament, both times thanks to four players from its highly regarded recruiting class in 2013. After two seasons, all four players had transferred out of the program. This year, the team finished at 18-15.

Smith said on Thursday that, despite the allegations, he hoped Hatchell would be able to return to coaching at North Carolina.

“I want her to,” he said. “I believe this is a case in which things are not what they seem.”

On Thursday morning, Hatchell’s executive assistant sent an email to season-ticket holders. The season-end banquet had been postponed.

“Those who have paid for tickets will be refunded,” the email said. “When the banquet is rescheduled, we will contact you with more information.”

Alan Blinder reported from Chapel Hill, N.C., and Marc Tracy from Minneapolis.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

NEW YORK — After a meandering search, St. John's finally settled on Mike Anderson as its new basketball coach.

Anderson was hired Friday by the Red Storm after getting fired at Arkansas last month. He also had head coaching stints with Missouri and UAB before leading the Razorbacks to five postseason appearances and a 169-102 record in eight seasons.

Once he was let go, it didn't take long for Anderson to land another job. Terms of the contract were not disclosed.

"I've been dreaming about this moment for the last nine days," St. John's athletic director Mike Cragg said during a news conference at Madison Square Garden. "And I found the right guy. We are going to win championships."

The 59-year-old Anderson takes over for former St. John's star Chris Mullin, who resigned on April 9, citing a "recent personal loss." His older brother, Roddy, died last month at 58 after battling cancer for years.

Anderson said he had not spoken to Mullin about the state of the program, but planned to reach out to him. Mullin guided the Red Storm to the NCAA Tournament this year for the only time in his four seasons at the helm. They were immediately eliminated by Arizona State in a First Four game, and the school doesn't have an NCAA Tournament victory since 2000.

In the wake of Mullin's departure, St. John's drew criticism for being unable to lure initial coaching candidates during a protracted hiring process.

Arizona State's Bobby Hurley and Loyola-Chicago's Porter Moser were targeted before deciding to stay at their schools. Iona coach Tim Cluess said in a statement Thursday he was contacted but was withdrawing his name from consideration. And according to reports, St. John's spoke to Yale coach James Jones and former Georgia Tech and George Mason coach Paul Hewitt about the job as well.

In a radio interview Wednesday on WFAN, wealthy alum Mike Repole was critical of President Conrado "Bobby" Gempesaw, Vice President Joe Oliva, and the school's board of trustees.

Ultimately, the Red Storm decided on Anderson, who is 369-200 in 17 seasons as a Division I head coach. He has never had a losing record.

Neither Oliva nor Cragg would comment specifically on Repole's criticism, but both defended the process the school went through before picking Anderson.

"I would say nine days is a pretty thorough and efficient search," said Cragg, who came to St. John's from Duke last fall.

Anderson, a native of Birmingham, Alabama, spent the first part of his career working for Nolan Richardson. Anderson played for Richardson at Tulsa before becoming an assistant under him with the Golden Hurricane.

When Richardson left for Arkansas, Anderson joined him in Fayetteville. He was an assistant coach at Arkansas for 17 years, helping the Razorbacks win the 1995 national championship.

Known for coaching up-tempo teams that press on defense, Anderson said his goal is to implement an exciting style of basketball that is "really entertaining." He said his teams would be "one of the top assist teams in the country."

"They're going to be one of the top turnover teams in the country. One of the better scoring (and) field goal percentage teams," he added.

Anderson said he envisions a team that's unpredictable.

"You don't know what we're going to do," he explained. "Our pressure may come from the half court. It may come full court. It may come from a zone. Now you've got to worry about what we're doing. I don't worry about what teams do. I worry more about what we're doing."

Anderson spoke briefly with St. John's players Mustapha Heron and L.J. Figueroa, who attended the news conference.

The new coach will have plenty of work to do in order to build a quality Big East roster for next season. Junior guards Shamorie Ponds and Justin Simon have declared for the NBA draft, while Figueroa and guard Bryan Trimble Jr. reportedly have placed their names in the transfer portal.

Anderson, who doesn't have previous New York ties, said his plan is to recruit in the area.

"I had somebody ask me, 'Who's the guy who's going to recruit for you?' My staff's going to recruit. That's who's going to recruit. Have three guys that are going to be recruiting and you're going to see me out there as well," Anderson said.

"I think it comes down to building those relationships," he added. "I know that they're going to see me. They're going to get a chance to know me."

Following the news conference, Anderson was scheduled to tour the school's on-campus facilities. He said the previous time he had been inside Carnesecca Arena was 2003 when he was the coach at UAB.

"I remember the last time I played (there), man, it was tight up in there," Anderson said. "I remember it being a really close environment and you put people on top of people, so I'm looking forward to getting over there and (seeing) what (has) been done since those days."

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Ahead of two major shows, the painter Jonas Wood reflects on his early career — and the most unusual object in his studio.

By Janelle Zara

Jonas Wood’s East Hollywood studio — a refurbished industrial space hidden behind a razor-wired metal gate — is populated with the familiar objects that appear in his paintings. There are colonies of potted plants and basketball paraphernalia that ranges in size from plush couch cushions to man-sized orbs. Every room is filled with art, most notably by the ceramist Shio Kusaka, Wood’s studio mate and wife, and Kiki and Momo, their son and daughter. 

But the studio is where Wood culls various photographs from the internet or his own archive and uses them as source material for his paintings — they are printed out and pinned onto walls, then flattened and distilled into blocks of color. Wood then layers these dense graphic patterns, overlapping fields of stipples and stripes, circles, squares, dots and wood grains.

[Coming later this spring: the T List newsletter, a weekly roundup of what T Magazine editors are noticing and coveting. Sign up here.]

Thirteen years into his career, following a year and a half of preparation, Wood is finally wrapping up preparations for the two biggest shows he’s ever done: an exhibition of new work at Gagosian in New York, opening in late April, and a survey at the Dallas Museum of Art, opening this week — his first major solo museum exhibition. Admittedly, the prospect of facing works — landscapes, interiors and portraits of family and friends — from his early career was giving Wood “a hard time sleeping.” He wondered, “Are the old paintings horrible?” and “Did I used to be a better painter and now I’m worse?” During the installation of the show at the museum last week, he had two big realizations: “I wasn’t a hack, which is a big relief,” and that now, after more than a decade of steadily producing gallery shows, he might be ready to slow down.

Nursing a can of tangerine-flavored LaCroix, Wood answered T’s Artist’s Questionnaire, which unearthed memories of the early days of his career, the first painting he ever sold — and the YouTube videos that nearly brought him to tears.

What is your day like? How much do you sleep, and what’s your work schedule like?

I drop the kids off at school, eat some breakfast, start working a little bit, usually have a meeting, have lunch and work for a couple hours in the afternoon. Maybe I’ll work for a couple hours at night. I’m trying to sleep more. In general, in the last couple of years, I’ve been trying to balance sleeping, eating, working, working out and spending time with the family. I’ve had my head down trying to make it as an artist since 2006, and I’ve had one or two shows a year for 12 years in a row. It’s not that I want to paint less, per se, but I want to take a step back.

I’m talking about taking a step back and looking at what I’ve done, and taking a step back from the pace that I was running and changing gears. After these two exhibitions, I don’t have any booked shows coming up. It’s a big opportunity for me to rearrange the way I spend my time. I love to paint and I want to paint, but I don’t have to paint right now, this second, and I don’t have to paint all next week and miss four school events.

How many hours of creative work do you think you do in a day?

Every day, I’m super into it. I need to paint. If I go away for a couple weeks, I’ll just draw. It’s like a must for my mental health. I would have to say that I’ve been all-in on painting since I was younger, and I realized that it was because of a lot of fear that it would all go away. That’s not how I want to paint in the future. The pressure and psychology of that setup isn’t totally right. I would like to build bodies of work outside the calendar schedule of art fairs and shows for a little while. I love painting, and I think I can paint without having a giant carrot in front of me. I don’t think that I’m the best at painting, and I want to get better at it.

What’s the first piece of art you ever made?

The first painting I really cared about was probably when I was a teenager, maybe 13 or 14 years old.

What’s the worst studio you ever had?

The freezing-cold basement of my parents’ house on Martha’s Vineyard. Winter of 2002.

What’s the first work you ever sold? For how much?

I sold a painting after college for $1,000, before grad school.

When you start a new piece, where do you begin? What’s the first step?

I think there’s a certain amount of avoidance. I like to have things sit around for a while before it’s go time. I find a photograph that I like, and then I usually make drawings. Maybe half the time I paint from the drawings and the other half from photographs. I use the photo for the structure of the painting; I project out different shapes, trace it out, mix the colors and build an image, like a flat map, and then I paint all the details on top. I like to have things just starting and just finishing and everywhere in between. I like to wake up and have choices to gravitate to.

How do you know when you’re done?

You know after a lot of looking.

How many assistants do you have?

Two.

What music do you play when you’re making art?

Mostly basketball podcasts. I listen to Howard Stern three days a week. Reggae, lots of eras of hip-hop, a variety of rock ’n’ roll.

When did you first feel comfortable saying you’re a professional artist?

I was a slow learner and a late bloomer in painting. I didn’t really put it all together until 2006. I had a show at Black Dragon Society. I made $29,000, I quit my job, and after 2006, I was a full-time painter. Making a living from being an artist and not having to do anything else usually changes a lot — something happens, sometimes it’s good, sometimes it’s bad, right? But you spend all your time doing it. You’re dedicated.

Are you bingeing on any shows right now?

Oh yeah. “Crashing,” “Million Dollar Listing,” “Vanderpump Rules.”

What’s the weirdest object in your studio?

This giant basketball is a sculpture by Paa Joe, a 72-year-old Ghanaian artist. Look him up. He makes fantasy coffins that are in most major museum collections. This was commissioned; I wanted a giant Spalding basketball, and I told him the colors and everything. I didn’t get a coffin because my wife thought it would be too morbid, so we got a throne. It’s actually called a palanquin, and you carry people around in it.

How do you get your news?

I just started listening to these quick little podcasts that The New York Times does. I read The New York Times. I go to CNN a little bit and check out some weirder news, like serial-killer names and stuff like that.

What do you do when you’re procrastinating?

Play poker with friends. 

What’s the last thing that made you cry?

It’s hilarious that this made me cry: The kids wanted to watch N.B.A. players flying into the stands trying to get out-of-bounds balls. I was like, “This is so cool that they’re so into basketball.” Even thinking about it makes me — it’s like happy crying. Positive. These kids want to see replays of Shaq, who’s seven feet tall, flying into the stands. You should watch it.

What do you usually wear when you work?

Gym shorts and a T-shirt, or some sort of long, funky pants. I like to feel super comfortable.

What do you buy in bulk with the most frequency?

LaCroix. I’ve got a variety of favorite flavors.

What do you pay for rent?

We don’t pay rent. We own the building.

Do you exercise?

We have a little gym. I would like to say that I’m fat and I’m also fit at the same time. I have a routine. VersaClimber and a lot of bands to strengthen the buttocks.

What’s your favorite artwork by someone else?

I love that Picasso goat he made out of bronze, where he uses a basket for the goat’s tummy. It’s one of the great bronze sculptures.

This interview has been edited and condensed.

An earlier version of this article misstated where Jonas Wood and his family reside. They live on the Westside of Los Angeles, not in an apartment above his studio. The article also gave an incorrect opening date for Wood’s exhibition at the Dallas Museum of Art; it was March 24, not March 29.

Janelle Zara is a freelance journalist specializing in art, design and architecture.  @janellezara 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

CHARLOTTE, N.C. — Consider the following scenes from the N.B.A.’s annual bacchanal/business convention known as All-Star weekend:

Spike Lee standing on a street corner waiting for the crosswalk signal. Stan Kroenke, whose family owns the Denver Nuggets, holding court in a hotel lobby. Joel Embiid, the star center of the Philadelphia 76ers, making small talk with the governor of North Carolina. An army of personal stylists waiting to be summoned by their clients for some of the flashiest events of the year.

And then there were the agents and league officials and sneakerheads and reporters, some of whom traveled great distances to make unconventional requests of the weekend’s main attractions.

“Shout out to my fans in Mongolia!” John Collins of the Atlanta Hawks yelled into a camera the morning before his appearance in the Saturday slam dunk contest.

[Slam Dunk Contest: Hamidou Diallo’s Dunk Is Even Better Viewed Frame by Frame]

All-Star weekend tends to be a blend of basketball and branding, business and pleasure — a showcase for a powerful league whose global influence continues to expand.

“The whole weekend,” Mike Conley of the Memphis Grizzlies said, “is just a big party.”

The All-Star Game itself, scheduled for Sunday night, felt secondary to just about everything else in the host city, as it has for many years. Daryl Morey, the general manager of the Houston Rockets, recalled waiting in line in 2006 for one of the more popular parties at All-Star weekend in Houston, where he watched Maciej Lampe — a center from Poland who appeared in 64 career games over parts of three seasons — bypass the line so that he could immediately be waved inside by security.

“And I’m like, ‘Man, I’m behind Maciej Lampe?’” said Morey, who would officially join the front office of the Rockets a little more than six weeks later.

All-Star weekend has only grown in recent years. One spreadsheet making the rounds in Charlotte listed more than 100 parties, and that did not include many of the more exclusive events. (Michael Jordan hosted a big one.) Thanks to a change in the league schedule, there is more partying and less deal-making than there used to be.

Last year, the league moved the trade deadline up so that it preceded All-Star weekend. In the past, the deadline came a few days after the game, a sequence which helped create its share of absurdity. One of the more notorious examples came in 2017, when word leaked during the fourth quarter of the All-Star Game that the New Orleans Pelicans had struck a deal to acquire DeMarcus Cousins from the Sacramento Kings. Cousins learned of the trade during postgame interviews.

The weekend vibe is different now.

“It’s so much more fun,” one prominent agent said at a party that he hosted.

In the corner, a disc jockey who appeared to be in his 60s spun tunes in a Hawaiian shirt and red-tinted glasses, while women wearing bright red dresses passed out hors d’oeuvres. Agents, clients and marketing honchos milled about the room.

But none of this is meant to suggest that deals do not get done.

On Thursday night, at a downtown hotel bar where patrons sipped $25 cocktails, a crowd of very tall men gathered as a private event wound down at a nearby steakhouse. Among the luminaries who emerged from the event: Adam Silver, the N.B.A. commissioner; Kroenke, who also owns the Los Angeles Rams; Brian Rolapp, the N.F.L.’s chief media and business officer; Bill Simmons, the founder of The Ringer; Connor Schell, ESPN’s executive vice president for content; and Bob Myers, the general manager of the Golden State Warriors.

“There are definitely conversations happening,” Morey said. “And there’s serendipity involved. You’re always bumping into people.”

Morey was finishing lunch at an upscale restaurant. Warren LeGarie, a longtime agent to many coaches and executives, and Kiki Vandeweghe, the league’s executive vice president for basketball operations, were dining at nearby tables. Morey was about to head into a meeting with Vandeweghe and Monty McCutchen, who supervises the league’s referees.

“Obviously, we care deeply about where the league is going,” Morey said, “so talking to Adam Silver about strategy or Monty McCutchen about changing how they might call certain things — all that kind of stuff could impact our franchise moving forward, so I try to be involved.”

The atmosphere may seem more relaxed than it was two years ago, when most team executives and agents were focused on the trade deadline, but the shift in the schedule has not pushed aside the league’s most pressing issues.

In Charlotte, a cloud loomed over the festivities, and it came in the shape of a unibrow.

Perhaps you have heard? Anthony Davis, the star center for the Pelicans, requested a trade 10 days before the deadline.

The Pelicans, though, rejected all trade offers for him and instead hope to reap better players and draft picks in a deal this summer. Last week, Pelicans Coach Alvin Gentry called the drama of it all a “dumpster fire.” On Friday, the Pelicans fired their general manager. On Saturday, Davis told reporters that his list of preferred destinations included the Knicks and the Los Angeles Lakers. Hours later, Silver said he would like trade demands and discussions to remain behind closed doors.

In any case, the Davis situation only underscored how much the topic of player movement dominates the league — even in the middle of the season, and even after the trade deadline. Everyone here was fixated on what could happen just over four months from now — at the start of free agency.

Will Kevin Durant leave the Warriors? Will Kawhi Leonard spurn the Toronto Raptors? Will Kyrie Irving bolt from the Boston Celtics? And, again, what about Davis?

“No one likes to see an instance,” Silver said, “where a player is demanding that he be traded when he’s still in the middle of a contractual obligation to a team.”

Silver made those remarks, and his wish for private trade discussions, at a news conference before Saturday night’s skills, dunk and 3-point competitions.

The media forum, like the carefully coordinated outfits stars wore to events around town, has become part of the event’s routine. So has the roll call of courtside A-listers during the dunk contest; this year’s included the rappers Quavo, 2 Chainz, J. Cole and Gucci Mane.

All-Star weekend was not always so structured — or extravagant. Paul Westphal recalled making his first trip to an All-Star Game in 1977 as a guard for the Phoenix Suns. The league hosted a modest dinner. Players received commemorative mugs. Anyone associated with the game stayed at the same hotel in downtown Milwaukee.

“It wasn’t like it is now where the game takes over the whole city,” Westphal said.

Kareem Abdul-Jabbar missed practice, Westphal said, then showed up about 20 minutes before the start of the game in a fur coat. Westphal helped seal his team’s win with a late steal against Pete Maravich. It was a moment he said he would never forget.

This weekend, Westphal was in Charlotte, where he was named a finalist for the Basketball Hall of Fame. He said he was not planning to attend any parties.

“Just dinner with friends,” he said.

In Charlotte, the streets around the host arena, Spectrum Center, were choked with traffic. Concert fliers hung from every lamppost. And none of the guests, spread among numerous hotels at premium nightly rates, seemed to mind the cold weather as countless lines formed for restaurants, bars and pop-up musical performances.

Given all the extracurriculars, it was easy to forget that basketball was the only reason anyone was here in the first place — and perhaps that was because the only legitimate basketball was being played in a college gymnasium a few miles from downtown. A group of elite teenage prospects, without much fanfare, had convened for the league’s annual Basketball Without Borders Global Camp.

In all, 63 boys and girls from 31 countries played in front of scouts and executives who hoped to identify the sport’s next batch of stars.

“There’s a lot of talent here,” said Brooks Meek, the N.B.A.’s vice president for international basketball operations.

The spotlight will find them soon enough.

Kevin Draper and Marc Stein contributed reporting.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Benjamin Hoffman

Marc Stein, an N.B.A. reporter for more than 30 years who now covers the league for The New York Times, and Ralph Lawler, longtime broadcaster for the Los Angeles Clippers, were honored on Friday by the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, which named them as the 2019 Curt Gowdy Media Award recipients for their contributions to basketball.

Stein, 49, and Lawler, 80, will be among those honored at the Hall of Fame’s September enshrinement ceremonies in Springfield, Mass.

Stein started his career covering the Clippers and then the Lakers for The Los Angeles Daily News, before moving to The Dallas Morning News as a Mavericks beat reporter and eventually a national columnist. From there, he went to ESPN for 15 years, developing a reputation for breaking news and helping the network build its digital coverage of the N.B.A. He joined The Times in 2017.

Lawler has announced that he will retire at the end of this season after more than 2,000 broadcasts in his 30 years with the Clippers. He established his reputation as a broadcaster in Philadelphia, working on Phillies, Flyers and 76ers games.

The Hall of Fame also announced 13 finalists for induction this year, including four first-time finalists: Marques Johnson, the 1977 national collegiate player of the year; Jack Sikma, a seven-time N.B.A. All-Star; Ben Wallace, a four-time recipient of the Defensive Player of the Year Award; and Paul Westphal, a four-time All-Star and a longtime coach.

The other finalists are Leta Andrews, Hugh Evans, Bill Fitch, Bobby Jones, Sidney Moncrief, Barbara Stevens, Eddie Sutton, Teresa Weatherspoon and Chris Webber.

The election results will be announced at the men’s Final Four in April.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Concepción de León

A student at a Catholic school in Kentucky has sued the Northern Kentucky Health Department, claiming it violated his First Amendment rights by barring him from playing basketball because he refused to be vaccinated against chickenpox.

The lawsuit, filed last week in Boone County Circuit Court on behalf of the student, Jerome Kunkel, an 18-year-old senior, argues that the action violates his right to freedom of religion. Being vaccinated, it contends, would go against Mr. Kunkel’s religious beliefs as a practicing Catholic, because the vaccine contains “aborted fetal cells.”

The lawsuit came after an outbreak of chickenpox at Assumption Academy in Walton, Ky., prompted officials to send out two warnings in February.

On March 14, the Health Department issued a statement saying that because there had been 32 cases of chickenpox at the school, students who were not vaccinated or already immune could not attend school “until 21 days after the onset of rash for the last ill student or staff member.” The statement also said all school extracurricular events would be canceled.

Mr. Kunkel’s lawyer, Chris Wiest, said in an interview on Monday that the school had told him in February that he could not play in or attend any basketball games because he was not vaccinated.

Mr. Kunkel is also now barred from attending school because of the Health Department’s action.

“I’m pretty devastated,” Mr. Kunkel, who was captain of the basketball team, said in an interview on Monday night. After playing for all four years of high school, “for it come crashing down at the end, it’s not very fun,” he added. Mr. Kunkel was not able to play in the last three games of the season.

The lawsuit contends that in Kentucky, students are allowed a vaccination exemption on religious grounds if they provide a sworn statement, which Mr. Kunkel did in early 2018.

The chickenpox vaccine is grown in cells originally derived from fetuses aborted in the early 1960s. Vaccines may contain nanofragments of DNA from the fetal cells, which are used because human viruses do not grow well in animal cells, according to a statement the vaccine’s manufacturer, Merck, gave to ABC News.

It is unclear how many students have been barred from attending the school because they have not been vaccinated or were found to be immune. Mr. Wiest, however, said that the parents of at least 18 children at the school had contacted him since the Health Department’s announcement.

“I think this is going to be a much bigger fight at the end of the day,” Mr. Wiest said.

Officials at the school did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Monday. But the Health Department defended its response to the outbreak.

The action, the department said in its statement, was “in direct response to a public health threat and was an appropriate and necessary response to prevent further spread of this contagious illness.” A spokesman for the department declined to comment further.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Chris Stanford

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning,

We’re covering the shake-up at the Department of Homeland Security, the Israeli elections on Tuesday and the N.C.A.A. women’s basketball championship.

Kirstjen Nielsen stepped down on Sunday after a rocky tenure in which she supported President Trump’s hard-line immigration policies even as he blamed her for the increased number of migrants illegally entering the U.S. (Read her resignation letter.)

After assuming the post in late 2017, Ms. Nielsen led the department during the administration’s “zero tolerance” policy along the Mexican border, which initially resulted in the separation of thousands of migrant children from their families.

What’s next: Mr. Trump named Kevin McAleenan, the commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, as acting secretary. In announcing a recent spike in the number of illegal border crossings, Mr. McAleenan said last month, “This is clearly both a border security and a humanitarian crisis.”

Catch up: On Friday, Mr. Trump withdrew his nominee to run Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Ronald Vitiello, saying he wanted the agency to go in a “tougher” direction.

Fighting for survival before parliamentary elections, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu unexpectedly promised over the weekend to begin extending sovereignty over the West Bank if he is re-elected.

The West Bank is home to 2.6 million Palestinians, who view the area as the possible site of a future Palestinian state.

Mr. Netanyahu’s major rival, the former army chief Benny Gantz, and analysts dismissed the plan as a last-ditch effort to rally Mr. Netanyahu’s right-wing base.

Explainer: Mr. Netanyahu is one of Israel’s longest-serving leaders, but he is facing his strongest challenge in years from Mr. Gantz and the leaders of a centrist alliance. Here’s a guide to Tuesday’s voting. 

Antibiotics, which have been credited with saving tens of millions of lives, have never been more accessible to the poor, thanks largely to the mass production of generics in China and India. Across much of the developing world, a few dollars will buy drugs like amoxicillin, which treats a broad range of infections.

But the increasingly available drugs are losing their ability to kill the germs they were designed to cure. Poverty is a huge and largely unappreciated driver of antibiotic resistance, which is often viewed as a problem in rich countries.

“We are quickly running out of treatment options,” a researcher in Kenya said. “If we don’t get a handle on the problem, I fear for the future.”

Another angle: A fungus called Candida auris preys on people with weakened immune systems, and it is quietly spreading across the globe. It adds a frightening new dimension to the threat posed by the overuse of antibiotics.

Jake Orta lives three blocks from Mark Zuckerberg’s $10 million home in San Francisco. A military veteran who now lives in government-subsidized housing, Mr. Orta is part of an underground economy, scavenging through others’ trash.

Mr. Orta sells what he retrieves around town and says his goal is to earn around $30 to $40 a day.

Our reporter, who followed Mr. Orta through the alleys of San Francisco, offers a snapshot of the extremes of American capitalism.

Quotable: “You’ve got more and more tech people here and this city is moving faster and faster,” said a spokesman for a contractor that collects San Francisco’s garbage. “These people have short attention spans. Some discard items that ought to be repurposed.”

On a monthlong trip in Honduras, a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and a photographer explored the rampant corruption and gang violence that is leading thousands of women to seek asylum in the U.S. Our Opinion section published their collaboration.

The country is one of the world’s deadliest for women, and the city above, Choloma, is one of the most dangerous. Domestic violence is common, and many women are killed by drug cartels and gangs, often in ways intended to spread terror. 

Battle in Libya: The U.S. military evacuated its small contingent of troops from the Libyan capital, Tripoli, as rival militias fought to stop an aspiring strongman from taking control of the city.

Internet regulation: Britain has proposed sweeping government powers to fight the online spread of violent and extremist content, false information, and harmful material aimed at children. The plan announced today would be one of the most aggressive to rein in corrosive online content.

Democrats and the death penalty: After California’s governor issued a moratorium on executions, Democratic presidential candidates have embraced abolition. It represents a generational shift for the party but follows a decades-long trend in declining public support for capital punishment.

Snapshot: Above, Baylor won its third N.C.A.A. women’s basketball championship on Sunday, defeating Notre Dame, 82-81. Texas Tech and Virginia play for the men’s title tonight.

Theater review: A revival of the 1943 musical “Oklahoma!” opened at the Circle in the Square Theater in Manhattan on Sunday. Our critic calls it “the coolest new show on Broadway.”

What we’re reading: This first-person piece in The Cut. John Schwartz, a climate reporter, recommends it. “Lizzie O’Leary, one of my journalism heroes, recently resurfaced this 2017 essay about the sexual harassment she’s experienced,” he says. “I’m thinking maybe I should read it at least once a year, and maybe you should, too.”

Cook: This easy pie uses crumbled gingerbread-like speculoos cookies in its crust, and a cookie butter spread on top.

Listen: Khalid broke out in 2017 with “American Teen.” On his second full album, he suspends his demons in melodies and rhythms that take cues from R&B’s past.

Watch: Did you watch the “Killing Eve” Season 2 premiere? Check out some of the creators’ influences, including a YouTube video, a podcast and a viral ad.

Read:  Here’s what to read and watch about Kurt Cobain, the Nirvana frontman and grunge icon who killed himself 25 years ago.

Smarter Living: Smartphones tend to occupy hours, but there are ways to give your fingers a break, such as setting up text abbreviations to eliminate repetitive typing. Voice assistants have also become more reliable. Set your alarm by saying, “Wake me at 7:30 a.m.” or say, “Do not disturb” as you enter a movie theater or a meeting.

We also have advice about how to deal with jerks, without being one.

Latin American ministers are descending today on Quito, Ecuador’s capital, to discuss Venezuela’s migration crisis.

The choice of location raises a question: When problems erupt in the region, is there a dominant city where they’re hammered out?

Not exactly.

The city with the largest population is Mexico City. The regional finance capital is Panama City. Brasília is the capital of Brazil, which has the continent’s biggest economy. Latin America’s exiles — from Cubans to the Venezuelans themselves — head north to Miami, where Spanish is often more common than English.

A peace agreement with Colombia’s rebels was hammered out in Havana, which has longstanding ties to both the rebels and the Colombian government.

While other parts of the world have centers of gravity — think of Beijing, Brussels and Washington — Latin America is still searching for its own.

Oh, what a beautiful mornin’. Hope everything goes your way.

See you next time.

— Chris

Thank youTo Mark Josephson, Eleanor Stanford and James K. Williamson for the break from the news. Nicholas Casey, the Andes bureau chief for The Times, wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.

P.S.• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about Russia’s campaign of state-sponsored assassinations.• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: Something raised during a toast (5 letters). You can find all our puzzles here. • The Privacy Project is a new, limited-run newsletter from The Times, exploring what’s at stake as technology blurs the lines between public and private. Sign up here. 

Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this briefing referred incorrectly to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel. He is the country’s head of government but not its head of state; that’s President Reuven Rivlin.

Chris Stanford is the writer of the U.S. edition of the Morning Briefing. He also compiles a weekly news quiz. He was previously a home page producer at The Times. Before 2013, he worked at The Washington Post and other news outlets.  @stanfordc 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Chris Stanford

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning,

We’re covering a purge at the Department of Homeland Security, today’s parliamentary elections in Israel, and the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball championship.

Mr. Trump moved on Monday to clear out the top ranks of the Department of Homeland Security, a day after the resignation of its secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen.

The White House announced the departure of the director of the Secret Service, Randolph Alles, and more high-ranking officials are expected to leave soon.

The moves reflected the president’s frustration about immigration and security, and appeared to be a housecleaning of officials associated with John Kelly, the former White House chief of staff who was also Mr. Trump’s first Homeland Security secretary.

What’s next: Mr. Trump’s push for tougher immigration policies includes the possible return of a measure that separated migrant families, current and former officials said. 

The Daily: In today’s episode, a reporter who covers immigration for The Times discusses Ms. Nielsen’s tenure.

Another angle: In clamping down on migrants, Mr. Trump has said “Our country is full.” Demographers and economists disagree. 

The country heads into parliamentary elections today with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, a veteran politician of the Israeli right, facing stiff competition from a centrist rival, Benny Gantz, a former army general. Here’s a look at the voting process and what’s at stake.

Mr. Netanyahu has overseen healthy economic growth, but charges of bribery, fraud and breach of trust have loomed over his campaign. We’ll have live coverage as the polls close at 3 p.m. Eastern.

News analysis: Mr. Netanyahu has promised to begin annexing parts of the West Bank, which would flout four decades of U.S. policy. He was emboldened by President Trump’s support, our White House correspondent writes.

Yesterday: In another move that could help Mr. Netanyahu, Mr. Trump designated a powerful arm of Iran’s military — the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps — as a foreign terrorist organization. It was the first time the U.S. has made such a declaration about part of another country’s government. Mr. Netanyahu and Trump administration officials have said Iran is the greatest threat facing Israel.

Tens of thousands of demonstrators in Sudan are demanding the departure of the country’s authoritarian ruler. Algeria’s longtime leader was forced out. And in Libya, an aging general is promising to end the chaos that followed the ouster of the dictator Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in 2011.

The uprisings across the Arab world eight years ago are still reverberating across North Africa, but the renewed unrest shows that the problems that led to the earlier uprisings remain. Those include growing populations of disaffected young people, closed and corrupt economies, and authoritarian governments unresponsive to the public.

What’s next: President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi of Egypt is to meet President Trump at the White House today. Mr. el-Sisi, 64, is seeking at least a tacit blessing before a referendum to change the Egyptian constitution so that he can stay in power until 2034 — in effect, as president for life.

Kelly Catlin, 23, won a silver medal in cycling at the 2016 Olympics and had a shot at gold at the 2020 Games. She was also a graduate student in computational mathematics at Stanford, setting up opportunities off the track. 

That seemingly solid path made her downward spiral all the more mystifying to loved ones. She was found dead in her apartment last month.

Quotable: Her father, Dr. Mark Catlin, blames several factors for her suicide, including a concussion in January. “I wake up every two to three hours at night to go through all of these permutations on what could have saved her,” he said. “I can’t help but wonder what she would’ve done with her life.”

The Boeing 737 Max jet that crashed twice in five months relied on decades-old systems and left pilots without some common safety features.

“It was state of the art at the time, but that was 50 years ago,” said a former engineer who helped design the Max’s cockpit. “It’s not a good airplane for the current environment.”

Attorney general in Congress: William Barr is scheduled to testify today and Wednesday to discuss the Justice Department budget. Some lawmakers are expected to question him over his handling of the special counsel’s report.

Saudis barred: Sixteen Saudis, including a top aide to Prince Mohammed bin Salman, will be denied entry to the U.S., Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced Monday. The Trump administration has been criticized for playing down C.I.A. findings that show Prince Mohammed played a role in the killing of the Saudi dissident Jamal Khashoggi.

Mar-a-Lago arrest: The Chinese woman who was arrested at President Trump’s Florida resort had a device to detect hidden cameras and $8,000 in a hotel room, a federal prosecutor has said.

College admissions scandal: Fourteen people, including the actress Felicity Huffman, will plead guilty, prosecutors have said. Fifty people were charged in the case, which involved faked test scores, phony athletic credentials and big payments.

The 2020 election: And then there were 18. Representative Eric Swalwell of California has joined the crowded field of Democratic presidential candidates. Keep track here.

Storm threat in Midwest: An unusually powerful storm this week comes after one last month that resulted in widespread flooding in the region.

Convictions in Hong Kong protests: Nine pro-democracy activists face prison terms of up to seven years after being convicted today for their roles in widespread protests in the city in 2014.

Snapshot: Above, Virginia won its first N.C.A.A. men’s basketball championship on Monday, defeating Texas Tech, 85-77, in overtime. The game was the first in 40 years between men’s teams that had previously never played for the title.

Late-night comedy: Jimmy Kimmel was among the hosts who bid farewell to the departing Homeland Security secretary: “Goodbye Kirstjen. Whoever replaces you permanently is going to have some very big cages to fill.”

What we’re reading: This article in Popula. Anna Holland, an editor based in London, recommends it, saying: “This is one of the best pieces on climate change I’ve read in a very long time. It asks tough questions of everyone — not just those on the hunt for a luxury apartment in Miami Beach.”

Cook: Spicy sausage and butternut squash are a perfect match. (Our Five Weeknight Dishes newsletter has more recommendations.)

Watch: “Fosse/Verdon,” FX’s biopic mini-series, premieres tonight and assumes a thorough knowledge of Broadway. Here’s a cheat sheet.

Go: “Oasis” is a charming, cheering piece of site-specific theater in Lower Manhattan. It’s a Critic’s Pick.

Listen: “Old Town Road,” the hit by the rapper Lil Nas X that set off a debate about what might be country music, is the focus of our pop podcast.

Smarter Living: Organize your kitchen like a professional chef to keep ingredients and tools handy. Separate cookware by function: prep, cook, serve, store. Date spices and keep them in transparent containers. And good knife skills can replace many gadgets.

We also have tips for securely mounting your flat-screen TV.

Lately, leggings have become a cultural lightning rod. But a retrospective of the British designer Mary Quant reminds us of an earlier fashion flash point: the miniskirt.

Ms. Quant, a trailblazer of Swinging Sixties fashion, famously said she “didn’t have time to wait for women’s lib.” Her higher-than-high hemlines insisted on young women’s right to bare their legs.

She named the skirt after her favorite car, the original Mini Cooper.

Pieces of clothing resembling miniskirts have been identified by archaeologists as far back as the 1300s B.C., but it wasn’t until the mid-20th century that the mini took off. Staying true to the Hemline Index (whereby skirt hemlines rise with stock prices), the miniskirt perfectly captured 1960s London. The trend has followed a boom-and-bust cycle ever since.

Bans on short skirts are enforced in several African countries, however, and wearing a mini can prompt outrage — and even arrest — in parts of the Middle East.

That’s it for this briefing. See you next time.

— Chris

Thank youTo Mark Josephson, Eleanor Stanford and James K. Williamson for the break from the news. Elizabeth Paton, our Europe-based Styles reporter, wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.

P.S.• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is about Kirstjen Nielsen, the former Homeland Security secretary.• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: Something built in a gym (4 letters). You can find all our puzzles here. • The Times’s recent article about leggings drew more than 1,800 comments from readers.

Chris Stanford is the writer of the U.S. edition of the Morning Briefing. He also compiles a weekly news quiz. He was previously a home page producer at The Times. Before 2013, he worked at The Washington Post and other news outlets.  @stanfordc 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Alan Blinder, Richard Fausset and Marc Tracy

CHAPEL HILL, N.C. — Sylvia Hatchell, the University of North Carolina women’s basketball coach, used to preach about “the fishbowl.”

“You’re always in the fishbowl,” Hatchell would tell players like Tonya Sampson, a former player who recalled the admonitions in an interview on Friday. “You never know who’s watching. You’ve always got to carry yourself with integrity and the best way you can.”

Twenty-five years after Hatchell and Sampson won a national title for North Carolina, Hatchell’s reputation is in peril and her team is in turmoil. U.N.C. officials, who were told late last month about three episodes that some players thought revealed Hatchell to be racially insensitive and aloof, placed her and her assistants on paid administrative leave and opened a storied program to abrupt scrutiny.

An outside law firm is investigating. Several U.N.C. players are considering transferring. And Hatchell, 67, one of women’s basketball’s most successful and influential coaches and a member of the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, is not talking beyond a single written statement.

It seems no one, from high-ranking state lawmakers to parents of players, is certain whether she will coach again at U.N.C., a Southern powerhouse of athletics and academics that has spent years grappling with issues of race. Hatchell’s lawyer, Wade M. Smith, could only say, “I hope she does come back.”

The allegations against Hatchell, privately detailed to university officials on March 28 and in news media accounts in the week that followed, represent a grave test to her 33-year tenure at U.N.C., where she is under contract for just one more season. And although the just-concluded season was modestly more successful than other recent campaigns, Hatchell has lately led a program that felt removed from the one that, not long ago, routinely won at least 25 games a year.

This year, in its first appearance in the N.C.A.A. women’s basketball tournament since the 2014-15 season, U.N.C. (18-15) exited in the first round with a 20-point loss to California.

Hatchell’s critics have been reluctant to speak publicly, in part, they said, because they fear retaliation. After so many years, Hatchell has become an institution at U.N.C., not quite on par with Dean Smith, the revered former men’s coach, but not far off. Many current and former players did not respond to messages, but some who did expressed support for Hatchell, even as they depicted her as a coach of searing, drawling intensity.

The university said it had hired a Charlotte law firm to “assess the culture of the women’s basketball program and the experience of our student-athletes.” Officials have declined to comment beyond that.

The law firm is expected to examine the quality of medical care for players and whether Hatchell had warned her team that “nooses” would await them if they turned in a poor performance against Louisville. U.N.C. officials were also told that Hatchell had urged her players to perform a “tomahawk chop” war cry to fire them up — a suggestion the women resisted — and that she had described players as “old mules.” Some people perceived the comment as a reference to female slaves.

Smith, Hatchell’s lawyer, said the coach “doesn’t have a racist bone in her body.”

He said some players had misconstrued Hatchell’s words, but he acknowledged that she had apologized after an internal uproar about the episode in which people recalled that she had referred to nooses.

“She said words like, ‘They’re going to hang us out to dry. They’re going to take a rope and hang us out to dry,’” Smith said. He added that Hatchell, who did not believe she had said anything improper, initially apologized by saying something like, “I’m sorry you took it that way.”

“The team did not see that as an apology,” Smith said. “I think she thought she apologized.”

But a furor still built, and the university, whose trustees declined to comment or did not respond to messages, will soon have to decide the fate of the coach, who cultivated the modern women’s game and has been known more for her fiery courtside coaching than personal controversy.

“I never encountered any kind of racial slurs or racism,” said Nikki Teasley, a former U.N.C. point guard who went on to a long career in the W.N.B.A. “My experience with Coach Hatchell was very heartfelt, very loving, very kind.”

Teasley, who is African-American, said she did not recall any racially improper comments but did say Hatchell was fierce and demanding.

“After playing and then becoming a coach myself and then a mother,” she said, “you understand that sometimes things do get overheated, and in the heat of the moment you do say some things.”

Hatchell grew up in Gastonia, N.C., a small city 20 miles west of Charlotte, and graduated from a public high school that had only recently integrated. Judge Jesse B. Caldwell III, who graduated from Hunter Huss High School a few years ahead of Hatchell, recalled little friction over integration in the area. Basketball, he said, helped bring people together. At nearby Ashley High School, an integrated team won a state championship in 1967.

Hatchell’s school did not have a women’s basketball team when she was a student. She began coaching as an undergraduate, and she took control of the North Carolina program, already an emerging incubator of basketball players, in 1986.

She became known as a skilled recruiter and drew some of the nation’s top basketball talent to Chapel Hill. Yet to people in and around her program, Hatchell sometimes seemed to be more of a chief executive than a coach. Andrew Calder, a Hatchell deputy since her arrival at U.N.C., was often credited with developing players.

“I learned the game through Coach Calder,” Sampson said. “You knew who the head coach was, but hands-on, no, she wasn’t hands-on when I was there.”

To a point, the formula worked. Lifted by a 3-point shot as time expired, the Tar Heels won their only women’s basketball title in 1994. Including that season, the Tar Heels have reached the Final Four three times — far less than programs like Connecticut, Tennessee and Notre Dame.

At their best, Hatchell’s teams played with an attractive, fast-paced style that relied on fast breaks and smart point-guard play. This season she continued to tout her up-tempo offense.

Hatchell’s stature has grown in a state where college basketball is prized. She missed one season, in 2013-14, for cancer treatment, but the next season North Carolina went 26-9 and finished with a No. 9 ranking.

Hatchell’s comeback era came as U.N.C. wrestled with an academic fraud scandal that reached into the women’s basketball program. Although the university was not punished, years of bad headlines, investigations and speculation took a toll. Some players cited the scandal when they chose to transfer elsewhere.

Hatchell, though, remained and, in 2016, received a contract extension. Last year, she signed a deal with Nike: $150,000 for up to four personal appearances a year until 2028. (The contract ends early if Hatchell leaves as head coach.)

Beyond basketball, Hatchell’s Christian faith has long been central to her life and her public persona. More than a decade ago, she started a women’s Bible study in the Chapel Hill area. For the last six years, the teacher has been Rachel-Ruth Wright, a granddaughter of Billy Graham, the North Carolina evangelist.

“I’ve never heard her say one negative thing about any of her players,” Ms. Wright said. “She’s always positive, always excited. She’s just an encouragement all the time.”

The university’s investigation might answer if she went too far in doing so. The Charlotte Observer this week published a scathing editorial about the conduct of college coaches.

“Other women’s basketball programs, including Georgia Tech, have fired coaches in recent years for mistreating players,” the paper, among the state’s most widely read, wrote. “If U.N.C. finds abuse from any coach — men’s or women’s — it should do the same.”

Weeks ago, Hatchell appeared in high spirits at a commemoration of U.N.C.’s only national title.

Hatchell visited a pregame lunch for members of that 1994 championship team, who were later honored on the court.

“She hugged me. ‘Glad to see you’ kind of thing,” Sampson said. “Then she was off, because she had to get prepared for the game.”

Alan Blinder reported from Chapel Hill, Richard Fausset from Atlanta, and Marc Tracy from Minneapolis.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

California Today

By Matt Stevens

Good morning.

(Here’s the sign-up, if you don’t already get California Today by email.)

This year the best college basketball team from California is not U.C.L.A.; it is not Stanford, or San Diego State.

No, this year, the best college basketball team from California might just be the University of California, Irvine.

Yes, you read that right. The Anteaters. (Zot! Zot! Zot!)

“We’re one of the top teams on the West Coast, and we have proven we’re probably the best team in California,” Ryan Badrtalei, an assistant coach at U.C. Irvine, said in a telephone interview on Monday.

Of course, claims like these are hotly debated at this time of year. But on Sunday, the N.C.A.A. selection committee announced the 68 teams that will play in the Division I men’s basketball tournament, and only two of them were from California: U.C. Irvine and Saint Mary’s, which earned its bid by winning the West Coast Conference tournament.

Badrtalei certainly has a case. U.C. Irvine beat Saint Mary’s this season on its way to a 30-5 record, good enough to earn the team a No. 13 seed in the South Region of the N.C.A.A. tournament. U.C. Irvine will play Kansas State on Friday in San Jose.

The No. 13 seed means the Anteaters are an underdog in that game. But the team has also been a trendy upset pick among experts, some of whom think the team could make something of a Cinderella run.

“The Anteaters are a terrible draw for Kansas State, and their upset odds are two times better than you would expect for a typical No. 13 seed,” The Washington Post’s Neil Greenberg wrote Sunday after the bracket was unveiled. 

Badrtalei said this year’s team features several upperclassmen who have helped them beat squads like Texas A&M and Saint Mary’s on the road — wins that give the Anteaters confidence that they can hang with stiff competition.

Veteran players like Jonathan Galloway, who is a first team all-conference selection, has helped anchor the Anteaters defensively. The team prides itself on rebounding well and being a “a real stubborn defensive team,” Badrtalei said, adding that Kansas State plays a similar style.

“We’re going to have to go out and play really well,” Badrtalei said of Friday’s matchup. “But these guys know their roles. They know what they’re doing. We purposely recruit guys who have a chip on their shoulders. We like that. We like being in the position where we have to perform.”

So can they pull off the upset?

Said Badrtalei: “There’s not a question in our minds.”

(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)

• Kevin Tsujihara, the chief executive of Warner Bros. studios division, has stepped down after accusations surfaced that he had pushed for a woman with whom he had a sexual relationship to be considered for roles in the company. [The New York Times]

• The Pentagon has provided Congress with a list of more than 400 military construction projects around the globe that it could raid to help pay for President Trump’s long-promised wall at the southwest border. The list includes dozens of projects in California, such as electrical upgrades at Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton and airfield maintenance at Marine Corps Air Station Miramar. [The Los Angeles Times]

• The mother of a 5-year-old girl who slipped off a rock on the edge of the Stanislaus River, fell in and was swept away is asking for help as the search for her daughter continues. [The Modesto Bee]

• A lawyer for the many people arrested in East Sacramento’s Stephon Clark protests this month is laying the groundwork for a federal civil rights lawsuit against the city, county and the police. [The Sacramento Bee]

• Representative Devin Nunes has sued Twitter and three users for defamation, claiming that the users smeared him and that the platform allowed it to happen because of a political agenda. [The New York Times]

• Five of the 10 most destructive fires in California since 2015 have been linked to Pacific Gas & Electric’s electrical network. We published a story and interactive on the utility’s safety culture and the risks it overlooked. [The New York Times]

• California is awash in cannabis cash from inside and out of the state. And in the more than two years since California voters approved the licensed growing and sale of recreational marijuana, the state has seen a half-dozen government corruption cases as black-market operators try to game the system. [The Los Angeles Times]

• For the last year, the Office of the Inspector General at the Los Angeles Unified School District has been roiled by internal controversy of its own. An investigation reveals new details about the turmoil. [KPCC/LAist]

• The Department of Energy has disclosed details about one of the most expensive computers being built: a $500 million supercomputer called Aurora that may become crucial in a high-stakes technology race between the United States and China. [The New York Times]

• Lyft officially signaled that it seeks to have the biggest technology initial public offering since 2014. The ride-hailing company said that it hoped to be valued at up to $23 billion when it lists on the stock market as soon as next week. [The New York Times]

• Levi Strauss & Company is also expected to start trading on the public markets. The maker of denim and Dockers is expected do so on Thursday for what will be the second time in its 165-year history. [The New York Times]

• The mayor of San Francisco endorsed a call by civic groups for Major League Baseball to impose a serious penalty on the chief executive of the San Francisco Giants. The executive, Larry Baer, got into a public altercation with his wife that was caught on video this month. [The New York Times]

• The regular season will start at the Tokyo Dome for the fifth time on Wednesday, and once again, the Oakland A’s will be there. They are hoping to stage a revival of 2012, when their visit to Japan began an improbable run to a division title. [The New York Times]

Yabba Dabba DON’T!

(O.K. Bad joke. We’re sorry.)

The distinctive property known as the Flintstone House might be fun to look at from the freeway, but officials in the town of Hillsborough and some residents there find the residence — with its curving lines, red and purple domes, and multicolored mushrooms — to be more of an eyesore.

Now, the town has sued the home’s owner, the retired media mogul Florence Fang, alleging that she did not secure the proper permits and approvals to add items and landscaping like oversize dinosaur statues, a retaining wall and a sign reading “Yabba Dabba Doo.”

You can read our story about the house and the lawsuit here.

California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Tracy

A federal judge in Manhattan on Tuesday sentenced three men in a college basketball fraud case to between six and nine months in prison, lenient sentences that the judge said were nonetheless important to deter the funneling of money to the families of college basketball prospects — an N.C.A.A. violation that a jury found last year also constituted a felony.

The sentences come ahead of a second trial next month at which more may be revealed about how widespread the rot in recruiting has spread.

James Gatto, the former head of global basketball marketing at Adidas, was sentenced to nine months by U.S. District Court Judge Lewis A. Kaplan. Merl Code Jr., another former Adidas employee, and Christian Dawkins, an aspiring agent, were given six months each. Code and Dawkins, who are also defendants in next month’s trial, were ordered to pay restitution of a little more than $28,000 each, with Gatto’s amount of restitution still to be determined.

Kaplan ruled that the punishments would not go into effect until the appeal process is completed. The defendants have two weeks to ask the federal circuit court to re-examine the case.

A jury convicted the three men last fall of defrauding the University of Louisville and, in Gatto’s case, also North Carolina State University and the University of Kansas. The men participated in a scheme in which the families of highly rated men’s basketball recruits were offered money in exchange for pledges to play for one of those teams, which are sponsored by Adidas. Prosecutors argued that by unknowingly making the universities vulnerable to N.C.A.A. sanctions, the defendants had victimized the schools.

Such offers are barred by N.C.A.A. rules, which require that college athletes adhere to the association’s policy of amateurism and not be compensated for their participation in their sport beyond a scholarship and related costs of attendance.

Repercussions from the charges brought by the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York have already included the firing of a Hall of Fame coach — Rick Pitino, formerly of Louisville, who denies wrongdoing and whom prosecutors did not charge. A Kansas player was ruled ineligible early this year after his connection to the scheme came to light.

The lawyers for Code and Dawkins welcomed the sentence.

“Happy might be the wrong word, but the judge granted a lenient sentence,” said Steve Haney, who represents Dawkins.

Haney also promised that the second trial, which involves alleged bribes to assistant coaches at top men’s basketball programs, would not only exonerate Dawkins but would also show how college basketball business is really done.

“We’re going to pull back the covers,” he said, adding, “This could transform college basketball and put the players in a situation moving forward so they and their labor are treated fairly.”

Haney pledged to put coaches on the stand — “as many as I can get into the courtroom.”

Robert S. Khuzami, the acting U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York in this case, said in a statement, “The sentences imposed today only begin to reflect the magnitude of the harm these defendants caused through a scheme that not only defrauded multiple public universities but upended the lives of young student-athletes and corrupted a game cherished by so many.”

Tuesday’s sentencing hearing in a packed courtroom on a high floor of the federal district building in downtown Manhattan saw all three defendants as well as their lawyers address the court and plead for leniency. They requested no jail time at all. While most of these statements referred to the defendants’ personal characters, some of the attorneys also pointed to the unusual nature of the case, which depended on a theory in which the universities were victimized by the defendants’ attempts to secure them top talent (albeit while putting them at risk of N.C.A.A. penalties).

“If he thought that anyone would conceive what he did here as a crime, he would never have done it,” Code’s lawyer, Mark Moore, said of his client.

Comparing the situation in the case to a legal principle called the “doctrine of unclean hands,” Moore suggested that widespread illicit activity in college recruiting called into question who was truly responsible for the harm his client had purportedly caused.

“Adidas has financial contracts with Louisville through which Louisville profited,” Moore said.

“You have not seen Louisville or any of these schools look to get out of their contracts with Adidas” since the scandal broke in 2017, he added.

Moore noted that although it was not admitted into the record before the jury, Kaplan seemed to recall an earlier scandal at Louisville in which a basketball staffer paid strippers and prostitutes to entertain recruits and players in on-campus housing.

Indeed, Kaplan himself appeared to raise so-called Strippergate, which resulted in N.C.A.A. penalties, during the prosecutor Edward B. Diskant’s statement to the court, in which Diskant insisted that the universities were the victims.

Kaplan said that the defendants had committed “a serious crime,” one whose purportedly common nature was not by itself exonerating: “The ‘everybody’s doing it’ argument, in short, is not a Get Out of Jail Free card,” he said.

But the judge also recognized that the alleged behavior of university employees like assistant coaches and, perhaps, the interests of the universities themselves complicated the theory of the case — on which a jury convicted — that the universities were victims.

Referring to Brian “Tugs” Bowen Jr., a prospect whose father testified that he had indirectly taken from Adidas in exchange for Bowen’s commitment to Louisville, Kaplan said, “To me, probably the worst, the most seriously injured victim of the Louisville scheme was Tug Bowen.” (Bowen was declared ineligible and is now playing professionally in Australia.)

On wiretaps, defendants made oblique references to their activity being typical of high-profile men’s college basketball. They also suggested that at least one of Adidas’s rivals were involved in similar schemes, though there have been no further charges.

Last year Yahoo Sports revealed documents that purported to show the families of several former stars who went on to play for many of the top college basketball programs were on the payroll of Dawkins, the aspiring agent.

The second case, scheduled to be tried next month, initially featured as defendants three former assistant coaches at major programs along with Dawkins and a money manager. The money manager, Munish Sood, reached a deal with prosecutors before the last trial and served as their witness. The three former assistants all pleaded guilty in January, after the guilty verdict in the first case.

A third case, whose trial is scheduled for later thus year, features the former Auburn assistant Chuck Person, who has been charged with bribery.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Chris Stanford

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning,

We’re covering Parliament’s latest rejection of Prime Minister Theresa May’s Brexit deal, Lyft’s public trading debut, and a plastic bag ban in New York State. It’s also Friday, so there’s a new news quiz.

Lawmakers today again refused to endorse Prime Minister Theresa May’s plan to withdraw Britain from the European Union.

After two previous rejections, the vote leaves Mrs. May’s deal in ruins and adds further confusion to the country’s politics, just two weeks before the scheduled departure date.

What’s next: The defeat appears to leave the increasingly weakened prime minister with two unpalatable options in the short run: Britain can leave the bloc on April 12 with no deal, a chaotic and potentially economically damaging withdrawal; or Mrs. May can ask European leaders — who have ruled out a short delay if her plan failed — for what could be a long postponement.

Shares of Lyft, the ride-hailing company, opened for trading today at $87.24, above the public offering price of $72. At the I.P.O. price, Lyft had a market value of over $24 billion, making it one of the most valuable American companies to go public in the last decade.

What’s next: Among those expected to follow in Lyft’s footsteps are its main rival, Uber, as well as the digital pinboard company Pinterest and the messaging platform Slack. Beyond cementing the place of the companies in people’s lives, public trading would unleash a new wave of wealth in the tech industry. Here’s a look at who stands to get rich.

A lawsuit filed on Thursday accused members of the Sackler family, who own the maker of the opioid painkiller OxyContin, of systematic fraud. The suit also includes major pharmaceutical companies that distributed alarming amounts of prescription painkillers during a rising abuse epidemic that has killed hundreds of thousands of people across the U.S.

The state is seeking, among other goals, to claw back money that it says was transferred from the Sackler-owned Purdue Pharma to private or offshore accounts in an effort to shield the assets from litigation.

Response: A spokesman for the Sackler family called the allegations “a misguided attempt to place blame where it does not belong for a complex public health crisis. We strongly deny these allegations, which are inconsistent with the factual record, and will vigorously defend against them.”

“After three years of lies and smears and slander, the Russia hoax is finally dead,” Mr. Trump declared at a rally in Michigan on Thursday, his first since the end of the special counsel’s investigation. “The collusion delusion is over.”

Mr. Trump took particular delight in ridiculing Representative Adam Schiff, Democrat of California, who faced calls from Republicans on Thursday to step down as chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. (He didn’t.) 

Related: The still-secret report submitted last week by the special counsel was more than 300 pages long, the Justice Department has acknowledged. Attorney General William Barr, who released a four-page summary of the report last weekend, has indicated that redacting the report for classified and grand jury information will most likely take weeks.

Closer look: Mr. Trump points with pride to last year’s economic growth and promises even faster growth to come. But economic data suggest that a slowdown is underway.

The Pentagon’s Africa Command recently outfitted gunships with devices that allow for covert strikes against the Shabab in Somalia. The dispensers can be discreetly fitted onto unarmed surveillance planes, too.

In interviews with The Times, military officials discussed the types of weapons the Pentagon has tested, offering insight into how Special Operations forces plan to fight in the future.

Plastic bag ban: New York State will prohibit many single-use plastic bags from retail sales by next March. It would be the second statewide ban in the country, after California.

Special Olympics funding: President Trump has reversed the decision in his administration’s proposed budget to cut the money allocated to the nonprofit organization.

71 pain-free years: The discovery of a genetic mutation in a Scottish woman who has felt little pain or anxiety may lead to new treatment.

Snapshot: Above, the Popocatépetl volcano near Puebla, Mexico, on Thursday. Popocatépetl, whose name means “smoking mountain” in Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs, sprang back to life in 1994 after a half-century of inactivity. Over the past few weeks, the volcano has become more active. 

In memoriam: Agnès Varda, a groundbreaking French filmmaker who was closely associated with the New Wave, died today in Paris. She was 90.

N.C.A.A. basketball: Gonzaga, Purdue, Texas Tech and Virginia advanced in the men’s tournament on Thursday. Here’s a look ahead at today’s scoreboard, as well as one for the women’s tournament.

News quiz: Did you follow the headlines this week? Test yourself.

Modern Love: In this week’s column, a man would rather not think about race when dating but has found that’s hard to avoid.

Late-night comedy: Trevor Noah revisited the college admissions scandal: “The whole country has been rocked by the news that hundreds of parents have been accused of bribing their kids’ way into elite colleges — and also U.S.C.”

What we’re reading: This article in The Los Angeles Times, recommended by Marc Lacey, the national editor. “My grandmother did not slather Vicks VapoRub on me,” he writes. “Neither did my mom. But I learned later, as this article notes, that many consider the pungent salve a cure-all.”

Cook: Turmeric rice with tomatoes is supremely comforting.

Listen: Billie Eilish is the teen superstar you may not have heard of — yet. Her debut album, “When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?,” is out today.

Watch: “Barry” and “Veep,” two HBO favorites, return this weekend. Here’s the best TV over the next few days.

Read: A new biography, “First: Sandra Day O’Connor,” by Evan Thomas, navigates the pathbreaking career of the first woman named to the U.S. Supreme Court. It’s one of 10 new books we recommend this week. 

Smarter Living: The desire not to miss out on anything means you’re not able to fully pay attention to anything. Putting reasonable boundaries in place has many benefits, so try no-phone zones at home and, at work, practice focusing intensely for around 45 minutes and then indulging in a 15-minute break.

And you can help limit deforestation, shipping emissions and packaging by greening your coffee habit.

Two American astronauts are making a spacewalk today, just not the two who would have made history. (Watch live on NASA’s website.)

One of the two astronauts, Christina Koch, was originally paired with Anne McClain for what was supposed to be the first all-female spacewalk. It was canceled after Ms. McClain found that the available spacesuit was too roomy, a safety issue that raised questions of sexism.

That made us think about the media coverage of women in space. In 1963, the cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova, 26, became the first, orbiting the Earth aboard the Vostok 6. She is now 82 and a member of Russia’s Parliament.

“Soviet Blonde Orbiting as First Woman in Space” was a headline in The New York Herald Tribune’s European edition, which reported: “Valentina — or Valya, by which she is known to her friends — seemed to wipe away the gloom of Moscow’s gray skies.”

That’s it for this briefing. See you next time.

— Chris

Thank youTo Mark Josephson, Eleanor Stanford and James K. Williamson for the break from the news. Karen Zraick wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.

P.S.• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about a family that lost a loved one in the New Zealand mosque attacks.• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: Bottom of a shoe (4 letters). You can find all our puzzles here. • The Times’s stylebook  says “most but not all compounds formed with space” should be rendered as one word. So spacecraft, spaceflight, spaceship, spacesuit and spacewalk, but space age, space shuttle and space station.

Chris Stanford is the writer of the U.S. edition of the Morning Briefing. He also compiles a weekly news quiz. He was previously a home page producer at The Times. Before 2013, he worked at The Washington Post and other news outlets.  @stanfordc 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Tracy and Kevin Draper

When the left sneaker of college basketball’s biggest star split open on national television Wednesday night 30 seconds into the biggest game of the season, what spilled out was not only his foot but also questions about the future of a marquee player and about the huge influence shoe companies hold over big-time college basketball.

The episode occurred in a game between the archrivals Duke and North Carolina. Zion Williamson, a Duke freshman, pivoted with the ball above the foul line, and the sheer force of his 285-pound frame and acrobatic versatility appeared to cut the shoe almost in two, as though severed by a sharp knife.

Former President Barack Obama, sitting on the sidelines at the Duke arena, was seen on video pointing at Williamson and appearing to say, “His shoe broke.”

As the scene was replayed on countless highlight shows on Thursday, the damaged shoe threatened to become a nightmare for Nike, which pays tens of millions to elite college sports programs to be the exclusive sponsor for teams and supplier of their footwear.

With his shoe split and his knee sprained, Williamson, an unpaid, budding superstar, sat helpless on the arena floor, staring at the shoe he was wearing in part because of a rich deal between Nike and Duke, one of the world’s wealthiest universities.

Here were all the issues of big-time college sports laid bare: Should amateurism be curbed in college sports, allowing athletes a cut of the money they help produce? Should a prodigious talent like Williamson, who is good enough to play professionally right now, have to risk his future competing for free because of an N.B.A. rule prohibiting him from leaping to the league from high school? Do the sneaker companies, which were at the heart of a federal fraud trial near the start of the season, do more harm than good in college sports?

For a quarter of a century, Nike has been paying Duke tens of millions of dollars to sponsor its teams, and to ensure that its athletes wear only footwear bearing the company’s ubiquitous logo. The players receive enough shoes to carry them through the season, allowing them to serve largely as free human billboards.

“All this does,” Gabe Feldman, who directs Tulane’s sports law program, said of Williamson’s injury, “is put a magnifying glass on an issue that has existed for a long time.”

Williamson has not commented.

Nike stock closed down Thursday by 1.05 percent, as the world wondered how a sneaker could split so badly in the middle of a game.

The answer remains a puzzle even to experts. James Gilbert, an orthopedic surgeon who worked with Duke athletics in the 1990s, said he had seen shoes fall apart similarly on soccer players, but never on the hardwood.

“I think it’s a product failure,” Gilbert said. “I’ve never seen that. I had no idea that that happens.”

In a statement Wednesday night, Nike said: “We are obviously concerned and want to wish Zion a speedy recovery. The quality and performance of our products are of utmost importance.” The statement called the shoe explosion “an isolated occurrence,” though in 2015, the Kenyan marathoner Eliud Kipchoge won the Berlin Marathon even as the insoles of his Nike shoes slipped out of place.

Williamson, who has a mild knee sprain, will probably be sidelined for one to two weeks, and then continue being the favorite to become the No. 1 overall pick in the N.B.A. draft in June. By then, he will probably already be a millionaire, because of the endorsement deals he can sign when he ends his college career. For now, he is an N.C.A.A. amateur.

Sneaker companies first became deeply involved with college athletics in the late 1970s, when an enterprising Nike executive, Sonny Vaccaro, arranged for several prominent coaches, such as John Thompson of Georgetown and Jerry Tarkanian of Nevada-Las Vegas, to receive money in exchange for outfitting their players in the company’s shoes. Starting in the late 1980s, Nike began to sign deals that covered all of a university’s teams.

“Now we see the kids wearing the shoes and selling the product all over the world — and the kids never got anything,” Vaccaro, who left Nike years ago, said Thursday. “The money has served the same people, except for the most important ones.”

A decision in a federal class-action lawsuit challenging N.C.A.A. restrictions on compensation is expected any day.

Standout basketball players were squeezed further in 2006, when the N.B.A. barred talented teenagers from following in the footsteps of Kobe Bryant, Kevin Garnett and LeBron James by entering the league straight out of high school.

Then, in September 2017, federal prosecutors in New York’s Southern District revealed more of the chasm between college basketball players, who can receive only scholarships and related costs of being on campus, and the administrators and coaches who reap the benefits of the revenue the athletes generate for their colleges, conferences and the N.C.A.A. itself. The men’s basketball tournament yields about $1 billion a year for the television rights.

In three complaints filed in United States District Court in New York, prosecutors accused roughly a dozen assistant coaches, middlemen and employees of Adidas of plotting to funnel money to players’ families in exchange for pledges that the athletes, among other things, would play for certain universities and sign with Adidas once they began their pro careers. The scandal led to the firing of a Hall of Fame coach, Rick Pitino of the University of Louisville, and has netted three convictions, including of Adidas’s former director of global sports marketing.

The transactions outlined by the complaints are practically the modus operandi at many top basketball programs, documents and testimony in the legal case suggested. Wiretaps revealed suspects describing at least one Adidas rival engaging in similar practices. Documents from the case reported by Yahoo Sports last year indicated that former top players at dozens of prominent programs — including Duke — had been on the payroll of an aspiring agent who has since been convicted of fraud.

Duke did not reply to requests for comment Thursday.

The specifics of Duke’s deal with Nike, which the two sides have extended through 2027, are not publicly known. As a private university, Duke is not obligated to reveal the terms.

But a look at Nike deals with similar universities that are public offer some indication of how the contracts work.

Nike’s deal with North Carolina, for instance, will give the university more than $90 million in cash and merchandise over 10 years. Nike also signed personal contracts with a number of North Carolina coaches: Roy Williams, the men’s basketball coach, will receive an average of $300,000 a year over the life of the 10-year agreement.

Contracts generally state that Nike is not liable for injuries suffered by athletes wearing its products. The contracts also require every player to wear the company’s shoes unless a medical condition makes Nike footwear unsuitable. A player might, as stipulated in Nike’s deal with the University of Michigan, be required to make himself available for examination by Nike or a local podiatrist before using a shoe made by another company.

It is not known why Williamson wore the particular Nike model that tore on Wednesday. It was a Nike “signature shoe,” a term for a style endorsed by a specific athlete — in this case, the N.B.A. star Paul George, who plays for the Oklahoma City Thunder.

What makes Williamson so compelling is the same thing that might make a shoe unable to contain him. He combines size and speed with strength and agility in the manner of James, who during a day off this month went to Charlottesville, Va., to see Williamson and the Blue Devils take on Virginia. Though Williamson weighs 285 pounds, at times he seems like the fastest player on the court.

“When you’re dealing with some of these athletes who are getting quicker, stronger, faster, you’ve got to consider some of that,” said Gilbert, the orthopedist.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Chris Stanford

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning,

We’re covering President Trump’s reversal of a longtime U.S. policy in the Middle East and a delay in Britain’s departure from the European Union. It’s also Friday, so there’s a new news quiz.

Mr. Trump said on Thursday that the U.S. should recognize Israel’s authority over the long disputed Golan Heights, overturning decades of American policy in the Middle East.

Mr. Trump’s announcement on Twitter came after persistent pressure from the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, an ally who is fighting for his political life with an election scheduled for next month. While popular in Israel and among some U.S. lawmakers, Mr. Trump’s decision is likely to be condemned almost everywhere else. 

Catch up: The United Nations has rejected Israel’s occupation of the Golan Heights since 1967, when Israeli troops seized the 400 square miles from Syria during the Arab-Israeli War. Here’s a brief history of the dispute. 

What’s next: Practically speaking, Mr. Trump’s announcement doesn’t change much, as the status of the Golan Heights is not under negotiation, and there’s no expectation that Israel will withdraw. But symbolically, the decision shakes up a debate that has changed little since the 1970s.

European Union officials agreed on Thursday to extend the deadline for Britain’s withdrawal from the bloc until May 22, as long as Prime Minister Theresa May can persuade Parliament to accept her plan for doing so. If she can’t — and lawmakers have already rejected her proposal twice — the deadline would be moved up to April 12.

The agreement effectively averted a disorderly and chaotic departure at the end of next week, yet such a break remains a possibility.

What’s next: Neither side wants Britain to leave without a deal. European Union officials said they remained open to a longer delay but that it would require Britain to participate in European Parliament elections — something that Mrs. May has said would be an absurdity.

A week after the terrorist attack on two mosques that left 50 people dead, mourners from around the world gathered in Christchurch, New Zealand, today to share the Muslim call to prayer and two minutes of silence.

“This terrorist sought to tear our nation apart with an evil ideology that has torn the world apart — but instead we have shown that New Zealand is unbreakable,” said Imam Gamal Fouda of Al Noor Mosque, one of the two attacked.

Related: In addition to announcing a ban on the type of weapons used in the shooting, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has pledged to hold social media companies accountable for letting hateful speech thrive on their platforms. As of Thursday, at least two people have been charged in New Zealand with spreading the killer’s video of part of the attack.

The Daily: Today’s episode is about the speed with which New Zealand planned changes to its gun laws after the attack.

The country’s national airline said today that it had asked to cancel an order of 737 Max 8 jets. It is the first publicly confirmed attempt to stop a deal since the planes were involved in two deadly crashes. 

A spokesman for the carrier, Garuda Indonesia, said that its passengers had lost confidence in the model. But he acknowledged that it would be difficult to cancel a signed agreement.

Garuda’s deal was for 49 planes, and estimated to be worth $4.9 billion. A Boeing spokesman declined to comment.

Another angle: Relatives of those killed when another airline’s Max 8 crashed in Indonesia say the airline tried to buy their silence with a deal that would also protect Boeing.

Small countries, corporations and wealthy individuals have a new weapon at their disposal: privatized spying through companies that hire former intelligence operatives. 

A monthslong Times investigation found that the firms have enabled governments to hack not only terrorist groups and drug cartels, but also activists and journalists. Saudi Arabia, for instance, has used the Israeli firm NSO, pictured above, to track dissidents. 

U.S. casualties in Afghanistan: Two U.S. service members were killed in northern Afghanistan today, bringing to four the American combat deaths in the country this year, Afghan and American officials said.

Cyclone’s aftermath: As floodwaters receded in Mozambique, people with very little before the storm found that they had even less. Here’s information about how to help people in southern Africa.

U.S. flood warning: Nearly two-thirds of the lower 48 states will have an elevated risk of flooding until May, federal scientists have said. The Midwest has already confronted record-breaking late-winter floods. 

Deadly blast in China: An explosion that killed at least 47 people at a chemical factory has raised fears of poisons spreading in the air and water.

Free speech on campus: President Trump has signed an executive order that links some higher education funds to how colleges enforce speech rights, a move endorsed by conservatives who say their voices have been silenced.

Perspective: In an Op-Ed, James Comey, the former F.B.I. director, discusses what he would like to see in the special counsel’s report.

Snapshot: Above, Holi celebrations in Amritsar, India, on Thursday. The Hindu festival marks the arrival of spring.

N.C.A.A. basketball: Day 1 of the men’s tournament had scares but no dramatic upsets. Here’s the schedule for Day 2, as well as a look at the women’s tournament, which starts today.

News quiz: Did you follow the headlines this week? Test yourself.

Modern Love: In this week’s column, a woman wonders if traditional romance is a trap, and finds that the ordinary is the most romantic gesture of all.

Late-night comedy: Seth Meyers is getting impatient for a certain former vice president to announce he’s running for president: “Joe Biden is the kid you played hide and seek with who would hide behind a sheer curtain. We see you.” 

What we’re reading: This essay in The New Yorker. Alisha Haridasani Gupta, a member of the briefings team, says: “Emilia Clarke plays Daenerys Targaryen, one of the strongest, most compelling characters in the ‘Game of Thrones’ series. Here, she reveals how through most of that era, she was struggling offscreen with near-death experiences from two aneurysms.” 

Cook: Drizzle tahini dressing on a bread salad with roasted squash. 

Listen: Holly Herndon’s “Eternal” is as propulsive as it is disorienting, writes Jon Pareles.

Watch: We have ideas on what to stream based on how much time you have. 

Go: Martinique offers Caribbean warmth with French accents. 

Smarter Living: After one of our reporters described a week of plastic-free shopping, readers wrote in with more tips: reuse rather than toss plastic cutlery, keep a coffee mug and a water bottle at your desk, and find new uses for yogurt containers, like painting or composting.

We also have a checklist to help you avoid screen-share disasters, and the cautionary tale of an extreme example.

What do lichens and politics have in common?

As you may remember from chemistry class, a litmus test determines a solution’s relative acidity. But the phrase is also used metaphorically to refer to a character-defining political issue, and it has been popping up in coverage of the race for the Democratic presidential nomination.

The chemical test, in use since the Middle Ages, employs a dye derived from lichens to determine whether a solution is more acidic or alkaline.

The political application of the phrase appeared in The Times at least as early as 1950, when it described NATO and the Marshall Plan as “the litmus test for distinguishing between Communists and supporters of the United States.”

This year, “litmus test” has appeared in The Times to refer to marijuana legalization, the proposed border wall and universal health care.

This week is the Times Magazine’s special Voyages Issue, featuring the travel guru Rick Steves, who wants to set you free.

Enjoy the weekend. See you next time.

— Chris

Thank youTo Mark Josephson, Eleanor Stanford, James K. Williamson and John Dorman for the break from the news. Chris himself wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.

P.S.• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about New Zealand’s weapons ban.• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: Lead-in to X, Y or Z (3 letters). You can find all our puzzles here. • Frank Sinatra was a lifelong fan of The Times crossword puzzle and became a pen pal of our third puzzle editor, Eugene T. Maleska.

Chris Stanford is the writer of the U.S. edition of the Morning Briefing. He also compiles a weekly news quiz. He was previously a home page producer at The Times. Before 2013, he worked at The Washington Post and other news outlets.  @stanfordc 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Fiction

When you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.

By Chloe Malle

THE FALCONER By Dana Czapnik 278 pp. Atria Books. $25.

Toward the end of “The Falconer,” Dana Czapnik’s electric debut novel, 17-year-old Lucy Adler looks up from Simone de Beauvoir’s “The Second Sex” at the Japanese maple on her Upper West Side neighbor’s terrace. It’s difficult to read the passage and not think of beloved Francie Nolan peering out another window in another New York City borough, almost 100 years earlier. Yet whereas in “A Tree Grows in Brooklyn,” both Francie and the Tree of Heaven grow up amid an unforgiving, concrete urban setting, Czapnik’s maple has been coaxed and cared for, its leaves treated with a protective coating. Lucy, a middle-class Manhattanite attending an elite private school, has battled none of the Nolan family’s hardships, nor is she plagued by the acerbic ennui that Holden Caulfield gave voice to in “The Catcher in the Rye,” but comparisons to both classic New York bildungsromans nonetheless seem inevitable. That is, until you realize that what binds them — all tell of a determinedly independent young hero’s quest for selfhood catalyzed by the crucible of New York City — is also what makes them so resistant to comparison. Like Francie and Holden before her, Lucy, a street-smart, superlative basketballer vulnerable to the perils of approaching womanhood, is too carefully drawn to be equated with anyone else.

Lucy’s fierce first-person point of view is as confident and fearless as she is on the court; she narrates her story with the immediacy and sharpness of a sports commentator, mixed with the pathos and wisdom of a perceptive adolescent charting the perils of her senior year of high school. A self-described “pizza bagel — a Jewish and Italian mutt-girl,” Lucy grapples with the rigid expectations of others, especially her harshly critical high school peers who have rendered her an outcast. “Isn’t it just so much easier for everybody when a girl fits into a nice little girl category — good girl slut tomboy girly girl smart girl ditz — instead of being a fully fleshed-out person who is in constant conversation … with all the various fractious parts of herself,” Lucy wisely observes. We watch that conversation unfold in real time through her adventures with her best friend, Alexis, a tough-talking Dominican sage tethered to Lucy through basketball and their shared outsider status; Lucy’s forays into the navel-gazing Downtown arts scene of her painter cousin, Violet; and, most pulverizing, her unrequited love for her emotionally unavailable scrimmage partner Percy, a self-proclaimed nihilist from a neglected but moneyed family who goes through girlfriends like Kleenex and is referred to by friends as the “Virgin Surgeon.”

But it’s arguably the nonhuman characters that give true shape to Lucy’s evolution: basketball and New York. (The novel’s opening line, “The ball is a face,” confirms the game’s significance and anthropomorphism for her.) Only with ball in hand does Lucy feel invincible and most herself, even as that self changes: “I ought not to imbue a ball with so much magic, but when I’m holding one I go from Lucy Adler, invisible girl … to Lucy Adler, Warrior Goddess.” Her self-descriptions on the court are as visceral and vivid as any sex scene, and when the actual sex scene does eventually unfold it is against the backdrop of a Rangers game on television, the commentators’ play-by-play mirroring Lucy’s own disembodied narration of her experience.

The basketball grows into a metaphor for the universe: “I bounce the world hard on the blacktop, and it comes back into my hand covered with a fine layer of New York City diamond dust.” The entire novel is indeed cloaked in just such a glimmering film, and Lucy’s love-hate relationship with her roiling city reflects her changeable hopes for herself and others. “I guess New York is like that, in that what you mistake it for matters as much as what it actually is.” Czapnik, who herself grew up in Manhattan around the same time as Lucy, captures nostalgia — for both a vanishing New York and Lucy’s evaporating childhood — with the lucidity of a V.R. headset. The early-90s era seems unremarkable to the characters in the thick of it — “We live in … insignificant times,” Lucy says between hits of a joint — but feels poignantly pre-9/11 to today’s reader.

Lucy’s coming-of-age is tempered by her constant brush-ups against the constrictions society places on her sex. Happening upon “The Falconer,” a bronze of a boy in Elizabethan dress releasing a falcon in Central Park, Lucy is envious that statues of boys depict them in action poses while women are either demure nudes or Alice in Wonderland. “Don’t you wish they made statues of girls like that?” Lucy asks Alexis. “Just some girl having unapologetic fun.” Alexis replies: “I never apologize for the fun I have. And neither do you.” Reader, beware: Spending time with Lucy is unapologetic fun, and heartbreak, and awe as well.

Chloe Malle is a writer and contributing editor at Vogue.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Tracy

BUIES CREEK, N.C. — With three seconds left in the first half last Wednesday night, Campbell point guard Chris Clemons was fouled on a layup. He banged the floor in frustration as the ball rimmed out, then rose and hit both free throws. Someone in the sparsely populated stands yelled, “Congratulations, Chris!” Given the size of the crowd, it’s almost certain Clemons heard him.

The second free throw was Clemons’s 22nd point of the night, and the 2,952nd of his four-season career at Campbell, a private university about an hour’s drive south of Raleigh, N.C., his hometown. It also meant Clemons, a senior, had entered the top 10 of the men’s Division I college basketball career scoring list, passing the former Kansas star Danny Manning. By the end of the game, when Clemons had finished off a season-high 48-point effort, he had passed Oscar Robertson, too.

“It’s kind of a gift and a curse that you’re not really able to enjoy the moment — or that I chose not to, rather,” Clemons said. “I do understand the significance of the events.”

History is being made in college basketball this season, but not all of it is being made for teams that are likely bound for the Final Four or by players who are projected to be selected early in the next N.B.A. draft.

With 3,006 career points at Campbell, Clemons is two behind Hersey Hawkins, the former Bradley player, for eighth all time, heading into Thursday’s game with High Point. At South Dakota State, another senior, Mike Daum, is poised to break into the top 10 by season’s end; with 2,943 points, he could pass Manning in the Jackrabbits’ game on Thursday against Fort Wayne.

It is an unignorable fact that most of the players still ahead of Clemons and Daum on the career scoring list are not household names, either. After Hawkins, for instance, Clemons could pass Keydren Clark, who played for St. Peter’s, in Jersey City; Harry Kelly of Texas Southern, in Houston; and perhaps even Alphonso Ford of Mississippi Valley State, who holds fourth place with 3,165 points. (First place, by a country mile, with 3,667 points, is the Louisiana State legend Pete Maravich, even though he played only three seasons.)

“I recognize that a lot of people on that list, who scored a lot of points in college, didn’t go on to have successful N.B.A. careers,” said Hawkins, who did have a successful N.B.A. career and now works for the Portland Trail Blazers.

Freeman Williams — who is second, and the scorer of 3,249 points for Portland State — acknowledged that his college years had been his glory days. “I got most of my attention as a basketball player back then,” he said.

Clemons and Daum fit in the same category. Daum is a two-time (and probable three-time) Summit League player of the year. Clemons is leading all Division I players in scoring this season, averaging nearly 30 points a game. Although both are likely to get opportunities to shine during the N.B.A.’s summer league or on its development league rosters, said Fran Fraschilla, the former coach and ESPN draft analyst, the 6-foot 9-inch Daum is at best a late-second-round draft pick. Clemons, who is listed at 5-9, is unlikely to be drafted at all.

The relative anonymity of college basketball’s leading career scorers appears to be a feature, not a bug. If you are scoring so many points for so much time, you most likely are not doing so at college basketball’s heights.

“If Mike Daum or Chris Clemons had gone to play in the Big Ten or the A.C.C.,” Fraschilla said last week, referring to the Atlantic Coast Conference, “they wouldn’t be on the verge of scoring 3,000 points.”

He added, “As good players as they are, they would be on teams with other really talented players, as opposed to going to a school like S.D.S.U. or Campbell, where virtually from Day 1 their talent was such that they were the dominant player not only on their team but in their league.”

And had they dominated as they have in a bigger league, they probably wouldn’t be seniors; the best college basketball players are around for only one or two seasons.

“Let’s not kid ourselves,” said Lionel Simmons, who is third with 3,217 career points for La Salle. “Some of these players, if they didn’t come out early, they could have scored 3,000.”

But even when top talents played for three or four college seasons, they did so for top teams whose other talented players lowered the individual demands on them. Superlative college players like U.C.L.A.’s Lew Alcindor (who later changed his name to Kareem Abdul-Jabbar) and Georgetown’s Patrick Ewing had the kinds of supporting casts that come with championship teams.

The most prominent name in the top 20, after Robertson, is Larry Bird, who played most of his college career at Indiana State, a team that he led to the Final Four, but one that needed him to average 30 points a game. But a place on the list can still be a point of pride years later.

Hawkins acknowledged that he kept tabs on developments in the career scoring top 10. In 2014, a Blazers scout was at the Creighton game in which Doug McDermott, now of the Indiana Pacers, passed Hawkins. “He was texting me, ‘Six points away,’ ‘Two points away,’” Hawkins said. “He thought it was funny. I was sitting at dinner getting texted every three minutes.”

Last week, Clemons deflected postgame questions about passing Manning and Robertson, saying he was focused on this season, in which the Fighting Camels (15-11) are third in the Big South. Asked whether he had kept the game ball, he laughed; of course he had not.

“After it’s all said and done, I’ll definitely go back and look, reminisce on the years I’ve had here, kind of be amazed at myself, know what I was able to accomplish,” Clemons said.

Like Clemons, Daum emphasized in a telephone interview that he has been putting his team first. Still, he said, he could not help noticing recently when he passed Bird, as well as Duke’s J. J. Redick and North Carolina’s Tyler Hansbrough, two stars from the last decade whom Daum had grown up watching.

“I feel like I’m going to look back on it” — his eventual scoring total — “maybe when I’m older, and be like, ‘See how cool it was to be in that position,’” Daum said.

“For me personally,” he added, “it’s just getting ready for the next thing.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Tracy

Fans tuning in to Saturday’s marquee matchup between Duke and Virginia waited less than two minutes before getting what they came for. On an early Virginia possession, Duke’s Zion Williamson, the impossible freshman who moves with a guard’s agility while weighing 280 pounds, recovered a loose ball and hammered down a two-handed dunk with Old Testament fury.

Williamson is expected to be the top pick in this year’s N.B.A. draft and has been this season’s signature player — a quality so inseparable from his ferocious slams that a rare missed dunk last week against Boston College became a highlight in its own right.

The only other player who has come close to capturing the collective imagination as Williamson is Murray State’s Ja Morant, a 6-foot-3 sophomore who has played his way from virtual anonymity to likely top-five draft position on a diet of Jordan-esque leaping, flying slams.

That Williamson and Morant are this season’s college basketball folk heroes is in one sense entirely logical. Dunks are popular, they dunk well, therefore they are popular.

Yet in the context of recent history and current basketball trends, they are outliers as stars because they are relatively poor shooters from long distance.

Neither player can efficiently utilize the 3-pointer, which has cemented itself as the most treasured tool in the modern offensive game. Williamson has made less than 30 percent of the 47 3-pointers he has attempted. Morant is at 32.7 percent, below the Division I average of 34.3 percent.

Williamson’s attitude toward the 3-pointer may be best summarized not by any of his own shots, but by his sensational block of De’Andre Hunter’s ill-fated attempt late in Saturday’s game, an 81-71 Duke victory.

Their proficiency in dunking over long-distance shooting signals how special they are, of course, but also might herald a market correction in which basketball’s most reliable shot is back in.

In recent seasons, the defining players — the ones who made the biggest impacts and summed up the college basketball zeitgeist — have overwhelmingly been sharpshooters. Think of Oklahoma’s Trae Young and Buddy Hield, Kansas’ Frank Mason III, Indiana’s Yogi Ferrell, Purdue’s Caleb Swanigan and even Duke’s infamous Grayson Allen. The last 7-footer to be named player of the year, Wisconsin’s Frank Kaminsky, was not a high-volume shooter of 3s, but he made 41.6 percent of his attempts in his Wooden Award-winning season. Villanova won a title at the buzzer when Kris Jenkins hit a 3.

Yet this year’s watch list for the Wooden Award includes Williamson and Morant along with other poor-shooting yet exciting non-big men like Duke’s R.J. Barrett and Tennessee’s Grant Williams. Marquette’s Markus Howard has received comparatively little attention as this year’s exemplary high-volume, high-accuracy distance shooter.

The ESPN analyst Jay Bilas said dunks were emerging as more crucial to offenses because so-called midrange shots — 2-point attempts that are not from close in near the basket — have been so devalued by analytics. Get to the rim. Get fouled. Or take a 3. Those are the modern basketball credos.

Bilas said it was possible that, after several years in which the 3-pointer has predominated in top offenses, coaches have improved at devising defenses to stymie perimeter shooting — in that way placing a premium on wing players who excel at close range. But mainly Williamson and Morant stand out because they are standouts.

“We’re seeing more dunks because there are more spectacular athletes out there,” he said.

“A lot of guys can dunk, but he dunks on the way up,” he added of Williamson. “His head is literally at or over the rim every time.”

Recent seasons’ emphasis on the 3 was easy to understand if you looked to the N.B.A.’s discovery of the 3-pointer’s efficiency. The Golden State Warriors emerged as a dynasty thanks in part to their high-volume 3-point shooting, and even they have been surpassed by teams like the Houston Rockets who attempt 3s at record numbers while confining their other shots to the restricted area under the basket.

Meanwhile, the trey picked up a cachet that had previously been reserved only for the jam. Players who sank one from deep mimicked bow-and-arrow shots toward their benches, igniting their teammates; Stephen Curry, Hield and Young became the players youngsters aspired to play like.

And to be sure, 3-pointers have not gone away. This season they account for nearly a third of the points scored in Division I, according to KenPom.com, the highest ever and part of a steady upward trajectory. Teams are making 34.3 percent of attempts, which is just a few fractions of a percent off the past couple years’ heights.

What have positively plummeted are, as Bilas suggested, midrange attempts. According to Ken Pomeroy, KenPom.com’s proprietor, midrange shots — defined essentially as 2-point attempts beyond a couple feet from the basket — account for barely a quarter of total field goal attempts this season. That figure was 33 percent as recently as the 2012-13 season.

“The 15- to 20-footers are becoming extinct,” Pomeroy said in an interview.

With players setting up farther from the basket, the dunk opportunity has opened perhaps more than ever before. And into that breach have stepped an uncommonly talented crop of dunkers.

“This is the best dunking college basketball has seen in a while,” said Chuck Millan, a dunk coach involved not only with high schoolers but with the N.B.A.’s dunk contest, which will be staged Saturday night.

Millan highlighted lesser known players with sensational abilities, including Connecticut’s Kwintin Williams, Florida Gulf Coast’s Troy Baxter and Arkansas-Little Rock’s Rayjon Tucker — “a freak of nature,” as Millan put it.

As for Williamson and Morant, Millan said that, as with chocolate and vanilla, a comparison comes down to personal preference — although he may ultimately fall on Team Zion.

“With Ja, it’s the dunks in traffic, because he’s little, and the body contact he takes,” Millan said. “Zion, being 6-8, 280, seeing him be just so agile and almost ballerina-like, being such a huge dude — it’s more impressive.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Colleen and Lauren Mullen, who rose through the coaching ranks and married, have a girl and twin boys. For now, Colleen is on the sideline and Lauren is cheering and child-watching.

By Kevin Armstrong

ALBANY — Lauren Mullen pulled her black hat low over her eyes, paid $10 for a ticket and entered Sefcu Arena just before tip-off recently. She sat in Section 150. There were 18 rows between her and any other fans. She trained her focus on the two head coaches.

On the visiting bench sat the University of Massachusetts, Lowell coach, Tom Garrick, a former N.B.A. player. Last spring, Mullen, then the women’s basketball coach at New York University, interviewed for the position that Garrick now holds. It was the third time in four years that she had been a finalist for a Division I head-coaching job. Her résumé included a 103-58 record and five postseason berths with the Violets.

On the home sideline stood Mullen’s wife, Colleen, the coach of SUNY Albany. Colleen got the job one month after Lauren lost out to Garrick. An associate coach at West Point for six years, Colleen reached the N.C.A.A. Division I tournament twice. When Albany hired Colleen, Lauren resigned from N.Y.U. to stay at home with their children: Maggie, 3, and their 1-year-old twins, Brennan and Callan.

“When you think about it, if I had gotten the Lowell job, I would’ve been over there,” Lauren said, pointing to Garrick. And Colleen, she added, would have been with the children. “Crazy, just crazy,’’ she said.

It is, though, the path they are taking as a same-sex coaching couple with three small children and all sorts of demands and challenges. 

Indeed, Colleen joined a small sorority when Albany hired her. Although the Supreme Court approved same-sex marriage three years ago and college campuses can be among the more progressive places in the United States, Colleen says she is one of only five women she knows of who are openly gay head coaches in college basketball. She recalled how Sue Johnson, her coach at the University of New Hampshire at the time who is now the athletic director at Concord Academy in Massachusetts, came out 16 years ago, when Colleen was a senior. At the time, Johnson’s longtime partner, Kelly, was pregnant, and Johnson informed the team of their relationship after a practice.

It was the chaos familiar to a lot of dual-income households that led Lauren and Colleen to a crossroads last winter. After four years of matching basketball calendars to Colleen’s biological clock to plan births for the off-season, timing recruiting calls around nap schedules, and wrestling with nanny problems and a merry-go-round of fill-in babysitters, they needed a change. 

“We were at a breaking point,” Colleen said. “A lot of coming and going.”

“Absolute insanity,” Lauren said. “To be frank, at the end of last year, it was like, ‘O.K., what are we going to do?’”

Both 38, the Mullens knew one of them needed to get a Division I head coaching job so the other could afford to step back into a supporting role. 

A pact was made early on. They would not pursue the same jobs, though they had competed for employment once before. 

That occurred when they met, in 2007. At the time, Lauren was a graduate assistant at Lehigh. There was an opening for an assistant coaching position, and Lauren applied for the internal promotion. Colleen, then an assistant at Southern New Hampshire University, also applied. They possessed similar credentials. Colleen stood 5 feet 2 inches and had starred at the University of New Hampshire as a pass-first point guard. Lauren was 5-foot-4, and was a facilitator at Hofstra. Colleen, who is six months older, got the job. 

Soon after, they played one-on-one for the first and only time. Lauren beat Colleen. Any lingering tension turned to mutual interest. On opening day of practice that season, they went on their first date.

“She didn’t hate me for that long,” Colleen said. “She got a master’s from Lehigh. She’s in good shape.”

Early in their relationship, they visited Colleen’s family. While there, they realized they had played in the same Florida tournament when they were 13. Colleen found a photo that captured Lauren guarding her on an inbounds play.

They kept their relationship quiet as they began to climb the coaching ladder, drawing interest from South Carolina to Connecticut. Once, while Colleen was at Long Island University and Lauren was at Sacred Heart in Connecticut, they were in the same conference. L.I.U. beat Sacred Heart both times they played.

“I slept on the couch,” Colleen said. “It’s fine.”

“She’s lying,” Lauren said. “She would have made me sleep on the couch. Takes her a little time to let the steam off.”

Colleen went north to West Point to become an assistant coach in June 2011. Weeks later, President Obama ended the United States military’s “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy, the 17-year-old law that banned openly gay men, lesbians and bisexuals from military service. Colleen then found herself in competition with Lauren once more, this time for a recruit. Her name was Kelsey Minato, from Huntington Beach, Calif. 

Minato was a prolific outside scorer and Lauren was the first to reach out to her. She and Colleen had sat side-by-side in the stands watching Minato at a tournament in Arizona, and Colleen encouraged Lauren to speak with Minato’s coach afterward. Lauren followed through. 

A few weeks later, Army realized it needed a guard, and Colleen asked Lauren whether she would mind if Army pursued Minato. Lauren welcomed the competition. Minato was unaware of the relationship between the recruiters, and narrowed her choices to Sacred Heart and Army. She eventually became the best player in Army history, scoring 49 points in one game, breaking records and having her No. 5 jersey retired.

“I was going to ride that wave for a long time, have a nice halo around my head for finding her,” Colleen said.

But it was Lauren who became a head coach first. That summer, she signed on to lead N.Y.U. While Colleen sold recruits on West Point’s structure, Lauren pitched West Fourth Street’s freedom. One day, Lauren announced that practice was canceled. In came the West Point women in camouflage gear for a boot camp.

“My players were all like, ‘Oh, no!’” Lauren said. “They wanted no part.’’

In any case, wins at both programs followed, along with a wedding in May 2014. 

“New experience for me,” said Dave Magarity, the head coach of the West Point women’s team. “There were a lot of cigars floating around.”

The Mullens were living in Ossining, N.Y. — 26 miles from West Point, 36 miles from Greenwich Village. And Colleen, known as The Mullenator at West Point, recalled that Magarity defended her sexual orientation. When a recruit’s parent asked which members of his staff were married, Magarity said, “Don’t ever ask that question again.”

“Dave was like papa bear,” Colleen said.

Last May, Albany, which has reached six of the last seven N.C.A.A. tournaments, hired Colleen as its head coach. After starting 1-9, the Great Danes have gone 10-5 and are tied for third place in the America East.

As a head coach, Colleen, who has been openly gay since college, now finds herself calculating when to mention Lauren, who came out when she was in her mid-20s. 

“When I am talking to certain people, and I bring up my wife, there’s a second thought in my head,” Colleen said. “It’s like, ‘Should I just talk about my kids?’ It doesn’t feel right when you censor yourself.”

Up in the stands, it has not taken long for Lauren to find her voice as a spectator. When the season schedule was announced, she cleared her calendar to be in attendance at Albany’s opener at the University of South Florida. She had not been able to make one of Colleen’s games in years. In the stands, Lauren described herself as “out of control.’’

“I knew it, but I couldn’t help myself,’’ Lauren said. “I was like, I need to calm down, but then I’d say, ‘That’s a walk! They walked!’” 

She and Colleen bought a house in Bethlehem, N.Y., last August. On a recent night there, Maggie played with Disney princess stamps as Lauren cut chicken nuggets for the boys. A chalkboard featured a to-do list above a diagram of “Double Horns,” an offensive set.

“We’re like a sociology experiment because Maggie wants gowns and she’d maybe seen her moms in like 10 dresses combined,” Lauren said. The boys, she added, had all girls toys to choose from but are indicating an interest in trucks.

And Maggie is learning what comes with winning. After a victory over the University of Maryland Baltimore County, the Great Danes awaited Colleen in the home locker room. Maggie was hesitant to go inside, so Lauren let her know that she would be waiting in the hallway. After Maggie and Colleen entered, the door closed behind them. A roar could be heard as guard Kyara Frames lifted Colleen in the air, per their celebratory custom. Eleven seconds later, Maggie ran out crying.

“Mom’s having fun,” Lauren told her. “The girls are having fun.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Victor Mather

The University of North Carolina has put the staff of its women’s basketball team on indefinite leave pending an investigation into the program.

In a statement, the university said the investigation was prompted by “issues raised by student-athletes and others.”

A Charlotte law firm will review the program. The head coach, Sylvia Hatchell, and her three assistants will be paid during the investigation.

“Of course, I will cooperate fully in this review,” Hatchell said in a statement Monday, after the university announced its decision. “I look forward to a prompt conclusion of this matter and the continuation of our very successful women’s basketball program.”

Hatchell, who has coached the team since 1986, is in the basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass. She won the national championship in 1994 and made two other Final Fours.

Several highly touted players have transferred away from North Carolina in recent years, notably Diamond DeShields, who despite a strong freshman year on court moved on to Tennessee and then the W.N.B.A.

Hatchell, 67, was found to have leukemia in 2013, but after treatment returned to the team.

This season North Carolina was 18-15 and returned for the first time in four years to the N.C.A.A. tournament, where it lost in the first round.

But her tenure recently has been rocky. Most notably, the team was at the center of an N.C.A.A. investigation into fake African Studies classes largely populated by athletes who got high grades for little, if any, work.

Many of the accusations in the case focused on Jan Boxill, an academic adviser to the women’s basketball team, who was said to have improperly helped players academically and steered them to the bogus courses. She eventually resigned from the university.

The N.C.A.A. eventually ruled that the team would receive no penalties because the classes were also available to nonathletes.

The university has not elaborated on the nature of the complaints that prompted the new investigation.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Howard Megdal

For Arike Ogunbowale, the trip to the top of the Empire State Building on Wednesday was unusually fast.

It had been arranged for her to bypass the lines and take express elevators to the observatory on the morning she was to become a professional basketball player. In the hours leading to the 2019 W.N.B.A. draft, these kinds of experiences did not faze Ogunbowale. Not after she had become one of the most recognizable faces in college basketball after hitting a pair of buzzer-beaters for Notre Dame in last year’s Final Four — one to slay Connecticut, the other to best Mississippi State and win the national championship.

“Nah, I’m used to life throwing new things at me now,” Ogunbowale said with a smile as she looked out over the New York skyline.

Even for the relentless Ogunbowale, the past week has brought a particular kind of whiplash.

On Wednesday night, the Dallas Wings selected her fifth in the draft, after the Las Vegas Aces took her college teammate Jackie Young with the top pick.

“You know, Dallas is a great place, and they have a great coach there, so I’m really excited,” Ogunbowale said, referring to Brian Agler, who has won the league title with teams in Seattle and Los Angeles. “I’m ready to get started.”

The draft followed her vintage set of performances in this season’s Final Four: 23 points in another win over Connecticut, and a game-high 31 points in the national title game against Baylor. Ogunbowale’s final shots came after a drive to the basket that yielded two free throws in the waning seconds, her team trailing by 2 points.

Then, the unthinkable: a miss. And a championship lost. Ogunbowale’s painful moment played out on the national stage, too, amplified in part by her previous success. Her mother, Yolanda, raced down from the stands after the game to reassure her, to say how proud she was.

“Over time, she’s going to realize that she won’t be defined by that moment,” Yolanda said Wednesday, hours before her daughter would hear her name called at the W.N.B.A. draft at Nike’s New York headquarters. “I was just hurting for her, and for her teammates, because they wanted it so bad.”

And there would be no time to process. A late Sunday night game turned into a Monday morning flight to South Bend, Ind., where Ogunbowale has one more class to complete at Notre Dame before she graduates.

Then it was onto New York, to see the realization of a professional dream that dates back to high school in Wisconsin, though first Ogunbowale had to choose basketball over soccer. (Oddly enough, Baylor recruited her for soccer.) She and her mother both say she could have gone pro in that, too. Confidence, backed up by results, runs in the family.

The path Ogunbowale chose has worked out pretty well. Over these last few days, her strength and her network of fans have fed off each other. Yolanda said Arike’s bubbly personality had drawn people into her orbit since she was a little girl.

Fans recognized her at the airport as she headed back to school, and some approached to cheer her up. People took notice, too, up on the Empire State Building observation deck. For Ogunbowale, it is becoming clearer that everyone still sees in her that dynamic personality, that same person who hit buzzer-beaters, who scored 55 in a high school game, who can count LeBron James and Kobe Bryant among her fans.

“Kobe, LeBron, all of them, they’ve missed some important shots in their lifetime,” Ogunbowale said. “It’s a part of the game, you know? I’m not going to be able to make every shot. So I’m glad about my career, and I think I had a great four years. Everybody’s been telling me that. I mean, that’s just one shot. But what you’ve done these four years for the program, for just women’s basketball in general, is big.”

How big? After the loss, Bryant reached out directly to encourage her. There seems to be something about Ogunbowale that make people root for her (unless they are part of the Connecticut faithful, that is).

And as her mother explained, Ogunbowale engenders a two-way connection, something of particular import for W.N.B.A. teams hoping to win both on the court and at the box office.

Liamani Segura, the 10-year-old girl who sang the national anthem at the title game, wanted a picture with Ogunbowale. Segura’s father worried Ogunbowale wouldn’t want to take one after such a difficult loss. But, as Segura’s father later told Yolanda, Arike approached Segura on her own for that photograph.

“So that’s the type of person she is,” Yolanda said of her daughter. “The person who, in the midst of that pain, she took her time to do that.”

And so while few expected Ogunbowale to be the first overall pick on Wednesday night, everyone wanted to hear from her, as she headed to Bleacher Report to talk about her favorite sneakers and to CBS for an on-camera interview, before getting down to the serious business of choosing a draft night outfit.

Erin Kane, Ogunbowale’s agent, had selected several options, and they headed to Express to see a stylist.

“You look great in a jumpsuit,” the stylist said as Ogunbowale settled on a sea-foam green one.

“Oh, I know,” Ogunbowale replied, ready for her close-up.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By David Waldstein and Kelly Whiteside

Another wretched Knicks season has ended, but from its ashes a justifiable optimism is taking root. The Knicks have the money to add two star players this summer, and there is a growing buzz in the N.B.A. that they could acquire Kevin Durant of the Golden State Warriors and Kyrie Irving of the Boston Celtics, who can be free agents.

With one of the top picks in the N.B.A. draft, optimism turns to giddiness. Could next season’s Knicks feature not only Durant and Irving but also Zion Williamson, Duke’s freshman sensation? Or will the Knicks trade their lottery pick for a standout like Anthony Davis of the New Orleans Pelicans?

Such big names potentially brighten their future, but there’s another name that could make a difference: James L. Dolan.

And so it must be asked: Will Dolan, the unpredictable and imperious owner of the team, find a way to mess it all up?

Based on his two-decade history as owner, there is reason to wonder. For the second time in five years, the Knicks won only 17 games, a franchise low. This was also the sixth consecutive year the Knicks failed to make the playoffs, and the 12th time in the last 15 years. It’s a staggering level of impotence for a team that spends as much money as it does and has all the inherent advantages of playing in New York City at Madison Square Garden.

That enduring failure, combined with Dolan’s public mistreatment of some fans, has led to a growing anger and skepticism in a disaffected, if dedicated, fan base.

Watching the team spin its wheels seems part of the appeal or burden: The Knicks have committed more than $800 million in payroll over the last decade — not to mention millions more spent on a revolving door of high-profile executives — and they spend over the league salary cap each year as a matter of course. They also have averaged no fewer than 19,000 fans a game, no matter how bad they were.

There are always appealing visiting teams to watch, and some seasons have started strong only to fizzle. But with such a crucial summer on the horizon, the thinking among fans and Knicks observers goes, perhaps not even Dolan can mess up this opportunity to forge a proven winner.

“I wish he had a longer fuse when it comes to the fans,” said David Stern, the commissioner of the N.B.A. from 1984 to 2014. “There are some overreactions, but it will have nothing to do with free agency or how the team is run. That all falls on Steve Mills and Scott Perry. Him having a short fuse at times will have zero bearing on player signings.”

Mills, the team president, has worked with Dolan on and off over the last two decades, and Perry is the general manager. They are the latest group that Dolan has entrusted to run the basketball side of the organization. (Others have included Isiah Thomas, Larry Brown, Donnie Walsh, Mike D’Antoni and Phil Jackson — all highly compensated and most of them successful elsewhere but unable to succeed under Dolan.)

Dolan may be seen as the odious, impulsive and vengeful tyrant of the Garden, but Stern said Dolan desperately wanted a championship squad.

“Jim has been on a crusade to get the best basketball people around him,” Stern said. “That’s what he thought he had with Phil and Isiah and Donnie, and what he thinks he has now with Steve and Scott.”

But even with some of those well-respected men, Dolan was known to interfere in basketball decisions, particularly Walsh’s. Dolan has vowed to cease the meddling, and Mills says he has kept his word.

“I keep him informed, but he does not get involved in what we do,” Mills said in a telephone interview last week.

Dolan, however, did dictate to Mills which news outlets could be involved in some of Mills’s own news conferences. On two occasions this season, The Daily News, which Dolan and Madison Square Garden accused of being biased against them, was not invited, meaning Mills did not have total authority over everything to do with the Knicks.

“Jim has strong opinions about the media,” Mills said, “and how he has been covered by the media and how we’ve been covered by the media. Really, my focus and what I have complete control over, how we build this basketball team — that’s what I lock into.”

Dolan declined to be interviewed for this article.

Several other executives who have worked closely with Dolan over the years but did not want to be named in order to speak candidly described a complex man layered with contradictory impulses and character traits.

He can be irrational but also is fiercely loyal to certain people. He can be socially awkward and quite charitable but also unleash a volcanic temper on employees.

He is said to worship his father, Charles, 92, the founder of Cablevision. But while Charles Dolan would carry lists of employees’ names in his pocket to help greet them and ask them about their lives, James Dolan is just as likely to walk past employees with barely a hello, associates said, and berate others in meetings. Many employees at the Garden simply try to keep their distance.

Seth Abraham was the chief executive of Madison Square Garden for almost five years, until 2004, when Dolan was directly in charge of the Knicks, the Rangers and the Liberty. The two worked together closely.

“He’s got the right mind-set,” Abraham said. “The issue is that he’s a zealot and his passion sometimes overwhelms him and the people who work for him. His passion is hot.”

Certainly, some fans and charities have benefited from his generosity, while others have felt the sting of his wrath.

Most notably, Dolan had security guards wrestle Charles Oakley, a former Knick and fan favorite, out of the building in 2017, an unpleasant scene that unfolded in front of thousands. And last month he had guards detain and then bar another fan from the building who had called out to him, “Sell the team!”

Although Dolan may eventually sell the Knicks and the Rangers (he sold the Liberty), few think he will do so any time soon, especially when the fortunes of the team could be close to changing significantly. The Knicks are valued at $4 billion, the highest in the league, according to Forbes magazine.

“Fans probably don’t like him because of the team’s record and because he didn’t engage much with them,” said Enes Kanter, the center who played parts of two seasons with the Knicks until he was released in February and is now on the Portland Trail Blazers, who are in the playoffs. “But if they knew him more directly they would probably like him more.”

Kanter said the fans had the right to feel the way they did because New York City is a great city, but its basketball team has struggled historically. “They deserve a good team,” he added.

They have not had one — a real good one — in 20 years, and the anger mounts. In fact, fear of a growing dissatisfaction among fans led to the Garden quietly limiting the amount of beer and alcohol that could be purchased at games late this season, perhaps a prudent decision considering the level of frustration in a fan base with little to cheer.

Prudent decisions have not always been the norm with the Knicks. This is the organization that Stern once said was “not a model of intelligent management.” That comment came a dozen years ago, toward the end of an ugly time in the history of the organization, when a former Garden executive, Anucha Browne Sanders, sued the Knicks and Thomas for sexual harassment, and won in court.

There is also a perception among fans and people in the league that prospective players want no part of the bungling Knicks because the team is mismanaged to a point where winning is nearly impossible. In 2015, the Knicks made offers to LaMarcus Aldridge, Greg Monroe and DeAndre Jordan, who was coming off two very productive seasons at the time, and all three signed elsewhere. The next year, the Knicks could not even get a meeting with Durant.

Now the hope is that Durant has changed his mind, perhaps convinced that he and Irving or another top free agent could be the ones to lead the Knicks to their first title since 1973. But with the Dolan wild card, hungry Knicks fans cannot be sure.

“He has cultivated an environment where N.B.A. guys don’t want to play there,” said Gary Horn, 57, a lifelong Knicks fan and screenwriter who grew up in New York and now lives in California. “But his grand flaw is that he has deputized people who don’t know how to draft young players.”

A few years ago at the Chicago predraft camp, Mills said, players and their agents told him that they did not want to join the Knicks but said the reason was more about the Knicks’ strategy under the former executive Phil Jackson.

“It was the organization, style of play, however you want to talk about it,” Mills said.

Mills added that he and Perry were working hard to change the perception of the Knicks and that David Fizdale, the coach, was a draw for both players and fans by dint of his magnetic personality.

Some fans are ready to believe the circumstances have aligned for a superteam.

“If Durant thinks playing for the Knicks is what’s best for his business and branding goals,” Jonathan Macri, a fan and founder of the Knicks Film School, a website dedicated to the team, said, “Dolan’s reputation as an unpleasant, impulsive individual isn’t going to change that.”

Kevin Draper contributed reporting.









Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Howard Megdal

The hiring of the W.N.B.A. point guard Kristi Toliver as a full-time assistant coach with the N.B.A.’s Washington Wizards while she is still an active player was widely applauded as a notable new achievement for women in coaching.

It followed the San Antonio Spurs’ hiring of Becky Hammon, and other women like Nancy Lieberman and Jenny Boucek also joining N.B.A. coaching staffs.

“With anything, you need to see it to be it,” said Briann January, a guard for the Phoenix Mercury and, in her off-season, an assistant women’s basketball coach at Arizona State. “I see it now because of Becky. Because of Kristi. I see the opportunity that is out there to take that next step in this professional area.”

For many players, the moves showed N.B.A. teams tapping into a longstanding, significant pipeline of female talent.

“I think a lot of women in general are missing out on a lot of good opportunities in which we can be extremely beneficial to any team, to any organization, no matter our gender,” said Alana Beard, a veteran Los Angeles Sparks guard often mentioned as a coaching candidate by her peers.

Beard cited the meager pay Toliver is to receive this season — just $10,000 because of limits in the W.N.B.A.’s collective bargaining agreement — as an “extremely important” issue for the league to address in negotiations for a new agreement. The goal would be making a barrier that has long been permeable on one side — men into women’s basketball on the coaching side — into a free exchange of talent, regardless of gender, based on opportunity.

Many, if not most, W.N.B.A. players, who are paid significantly less than their male counterparts, cannot afford to spend their off-season working for so little pay. Their basketball skills are worth much more — into the millions of dollars — in service of women’s leagues overseas.

“All of those things on a coach’s plate to take care of, to do that for $10,000 for an entire N.B.A. season is crazy,” January said. “I’d like to break that down and do the math, like how much that is a game or how much that is a day. That would just be insult to injury.”

Yet some people, including commentators on internet sites and men’s basketball fans in real life, contend these women should be happy to have opportunities at all.

This attitude rankles many W.N.B.A. players — that even Toliver’s shot, let alone chances for other women with considerable experience playing and in many cases coaching, is often thought of as a one-sided benefit for those who are hired.

But in many cases, the N.B.A. came calling after seeing the women excelling on their own. Toliver’s work with the Mystics helped bring her to the attention of Wizards Coach Scott Brooks, just as Hammon got her opportunity in San Antonio because she was employed by the Silver Stars, then owned by the same group as the Spurs, and her W.N.B.A. coach, Dan Hughes, talked her up to Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich.

“I had a chance to put two parties together that I knew would work,” Hughes, now the head coach of the Seattle Storm, said. “I knew Becky, and I also knew Pop, and I knew that Pop, we had a lot of years of conversation about Becky. He had seen her play when I first brought her to San Antonio. So to me it was an opportunity to merge two people that would benefit from each other.”

Toliver has opened up that discussion in significant ways, which she said was a large part of her reasoning for taking the job in the first place. In Hughes’s eyes, it is nothing less than the overdue elimination of whatever combination of sexism and inertia has prevented the men’s basketball world from taking advantage of all the talent amassed on the women’s side of the sport, the next step toward N.B.A. teams and W.N.B.A. teams and men’s and women’s college basketball programs all hiring from the same pool of candidates.

As Hughes sees it, it’s time, not because these women deserve a chance, but because every basketball team needs more coaches like Hammon, Toliver and those who will follow.

“I want a world someday where people judge coaches on how good a coach they truly are,” Hughes said. “Doesn’t matter if they’re male or female, doesn’t matter their background. They can say he’s a coach or she’s a coach, and we can use them.”

Every W.N.B.A. player who stays home instead of playing overseas in her off-season, the athletes said, is potentially one more person around which to promote the league year-round, and that player gets to rest, too. The grind of playing 12 months a year has led to W.N.B.A. players like Diana Taurasi and Angel McCoughtry taking seasons off.

“You always want to protect your product,” January said. “And the majority of our product is being run down and beaten up year-round playing this game. So when they come back around to play in the W.N.B.A., you have half of your players injured, playing through nagging things. We still find a way to have a high talent and high level of basketball, which is crazy to me.

“We just have some really strong women, but that needs to be a discussion. What can we do to provide other opportunities for women to make income and prepare for the future on a real-life scale? Something they can live on. Something that makes sense.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Seth Berkman

Seven years ago, Tacko Fall and Christ Koumadje were discovered by basketball scouts in a similar fashion.

They were hard to miss.

On the streets of Dakar, Senegal, the two 7-footers stood out. They were spotted by employees of the Flying Star Academy, a Senegalese training ground for several basketball players who have ended up on college teams in the United States. The employees chased after the teenagers, imploring them to try their enormous hands at the sport.

[Follow our live coverage of the N.C.A.A. tournament here.]

At the time, Koumadje, now a 7-foot-4 senior at Florida State, preferred soccer. Fall, now a 7-foot-6 senior at Central Florida, was more interested in devouring anime and manga series like “Naruto” and “Tokyo Ghoul.” Both were, at first, indifferent to basketball.

But their potential upside was difficult to ignore. To onlookers, they evoked thoughts of the next Hakeem Olajuwon or Yao Ming.

Today, their size offers less promise. They toiled to become giant forces in the paint, only to watch as basketball evolved from a game that coveted height into a more freewheeling, 3-point-centric game that deems their skill sets nearly as obsolete as a fax machine: nice to have, but no longer entirely necessary.

“What’s interesting about both, their advanced analytics, they play off the charts — well over 1 point per possession, and that’s really effective in college basketball,” said Steve Kyler, the editor and publisher of Basketball Insiders, which produces weekly N.B.A. mock drafts. “When you dig deeper, in situational-type things they grade really well, but the truth of the matter is the N.B.A. game isn’t played that way anymore. It’s all about stretch 5s, quickness.”

“I think they may get a look on the fringe based off their size,” Kyler added. “But a guy 7-foot-6 being the first overall pick or top five is pretty rare now.”

In the college game, where height can still create a tangible advantage, Fall and Koumadje — who are among the tallest players currently in Division I — will be crucial cogs in their teams’ N.C.A.A. tournament performance.

Beyond that, whether they can find a place and purpose in the N.B.A. — where the only active players who stand 7-foot-3 or taller are Dallas’s Kristaps Porzingis, who has a far more diverse skill set, and Philadelphia’s Boban Marjanovic — remains to be seen.

“Extending my range is something I definitely want to work on,” said Fall, who helped the Knights earn their first N.C.A.A. tournament berth since 2005 by averaging nearly 11 points and 7 rebounds a game. “I’m not going to go out there and shoot 3s like a lot of bigs do now, but pick my spots.

“But I feel like no matter how the game has changed, you still need somebody down low to do some damage.”

Basketball academies in Senegal like Flying Star now regularly send players abroad. After playing for a few months at the academy, Fall got a chance to join a high school team in the United States. His mother reluctantly let her son go, hoping he would receive a better education.

Extremely raw when he arrived at Liberty Christian Preparatory School in Tavares, Fla., Fall almost quit basketball. But he refined his game while playing on a travel team alongside Ben Simmons, now with the Philadelphia 76ers. Fall also trained in Houston with Olajuwon, a Hall of Famer who emphasized the importance of footwork for a center his size.

Occasionally, Fall watched Simmons at nearby Montverde Academy, where Koumadje landed after coming to the United States. Fall and Koumadje only briefly overlapped in Dakar — Koumadje is originally from Chad — but in high school they talked on the phone or via Facebook. Their discussions rarely veered into basketball. Instead, they commiserated about the difficulties of adjusting to life when you are over 7 feet tall and 4,500 miles from home.

Koumadje, like Fall, grasps the unlikelihood that he will develop into a free-shooting N.B.A. big man. Before his senior year in high school, he played pickup games at the University of Southern California with Andre Drummond of the Detroit Pistons. It was then, Koumadje said, that he realized he was more effective cemented in the post.

“The game is evolving and that’s what people want,” said Koumadje, a two-year starter who led the Seminoles in blocked shots this season. “But I play to my strength. That’s what I do.”

Fall’s turning point came after his sophomore season at Central Florida, when he contemplated entering the 2017 N.B.A. draft. Five teams told him he needed vast improvement adapting to the speed of the pros, particularly in guarding pick-and-rolls.

Central Florida Coach Johnny Dawkins — a former Duke guard who played with the towering centers Shawn Bradley and Manute Bol in the N.B.A. — was hired before Fall’s sophomore year, and created a three-year plan for him. Increasing mobility and stamina came first, followed by catching the ball down low and learning to work out of double and triple teams. This season, Dawkins has moved Fall farther out on the perimeter defensively.

Wherever he stands, Fall often forces opposing players to elevate more when they shoot, to get the ball over his arms.

“Our floaters have to be a little bit higher, and it probably screwed a couple of guys up,” Fran Dunphy, Temple’s coach at the time, said after a game against Central Florida on March 9.

Teams have tried less inventive strategies to bypass Fall’s 8-foot-4 wingspan. Fall, who is bulkier than Bol or Bradley, said that he had heard opposing coaches tell players to go after his knees.

Though he is all but assured of breaking the Division I record for career field-goal percentage — he currently shoots over 74 percent; the record is 67.8 — Fall converts only 36 percent of his free throws. Fall — whose hands are 10½ inches long — said that when he shoots free throws it feels as if he is holding a volleyball.

His shooting form, which involves using only his right hand while flinging his left arm in the air and then slouching, has drawn derisive comments on social media, where he is sometimes treated as a sideshow. After Fall had 13 points and 10 rebounds in a win over Houston that ended the Cougars' 33-game home winning streak, Fall got more attention for a GIF that showed him holding the ball over an opponent’s head like an older brother playing keep-away.

Fall and Koumadje are accustomed to stares in airports and snide remarks from opposing fans. While both harbor N.B.A. dreams — neither appears in most mock drafts — they also envision a life beyond basketball, when their height won’t dictate how others perceive them.

Koumadje said he would eventually like to work for the United Nations, helping refugees in Chad. Fall wants to become an engineer.

“Basketball’s opened a lot of doors for me, but there’s more to me than the ball, the hoop,” Fall said. “I definitely don’t want to be defined by that. I definitely don’t want to be seen as an attraction, either.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Scott Cacciola

LOS ANGELES — Hours after Magic Johnson abruptly resigned as the Los Angeles Lakers’ president of basketball operations, and mere minutes after LeBron James’s first season as the franchise cornerstone ended with a buzzer-beating loss, James left Staples Center on Tuesday night without speaking to reporters, trailed only by security officers and questions about the team’s future.

It was not the season anyone envisioned for the Lakers, who had upended the N.B.A. by signing James last summer with the hype and expectation of returning the franchise to its glory years. One of the most storied teams in the league, the Lakers have not won a championship in nine years, and Los Angeles is frustrated, hungry and impatient.

Instead, the team collected nearly as many injuries as losses. James, who will miss the N.B.A. playoffs beginning Saturday for the first time in 14 years, watched the final six games of the season from the bench as the team looked to preserve him for next season. His next buzzy stop is a studio lot as the star of “Space Jam 2,” which he has said is set to begin filming this summer.

For the Lakers (37-45), all the drama was off the court, right up to the end, with Johnson’s abrupt announcement so out-of-the-blue that he had not even told his boss, the team owner Jeanie Buss, before wading into a gaggle of reporters.

[Here is a look at Magic Johnson’s biggest moments as team president.]

On Wednesday morning, Johnson, 59, wrote on Twitter that he considers himself a “Laker for life.”

He announced in 1991 that he was H.I.V. positive but said Tuesday that he was in good health and it was not a factor in his decision.

Johnson had sealed a $154 million, four-year deal for James — two greats fulfilling their needs: Johnson to restore luster to a glamorous team; James to close out his career as a Laker and develop his business and entertainment interests centered on Hollywood.

And now they both left Staples Center with a losing record and a team in chaos.

In some ways, it was the perfect finale to a season that trafficked in dysfunction.

So there was the coach, Luke Walton, saying what losing coaches always say: essentially, wait until next year. His job may have been saved when Johnson quit, but he would not talk about that.

“We have a lot of time to work and get better,” Walton said late Tuesday after the Lakers’ loss to the Portland Trail Blazers. “Let’s organize and prioritize what we need to do so we can give ourselves a better chance next season.”

It was a wasted season for everyone involved, and James is as polarizing as ever, even in Los Angeles, where as much as fans banked on him, they also retained a degree of skepticism that this was all real.

Jonas Never, a prominent Los Angeles-based street artist, found that out the hard way.

“Honestly,” Never said in a telephone interview, “Lakers fans are the trickiest.”

Last July, he had talked a restaurant owner in Venice Beach into allowing him to paint a mural of James in a Lakers jersey to commemorate his arrival: 75 cans of spray paint in 12 hours for the “King of L.A.”

It did not take long for the mural to be vandalized — not just once, but twice in a span of four days. The first time, it was salvageable. Someone had defaced the wall with the words “We Don’t Want You” and “No King,” along with “3-6,” a reference to James’s losing record in the N.B.A. finals. But Never was able to restore the mural. (“A two-minute fix,” he said.)

The second time, someone splashed yellow paint all over James’s face, and Never had no choice but to paint over it.

“If it had been a car, it would have been totaled,” he said.

To be fair, most fans were excited about James. The news media coverage was breathless. And perhaps no member of the ticket-paying public had invested more in LeBron-to-L.A. than Jacob Emrani, a personal injury lawyer from Beverly Hills, Calif., who had purchased space for 40 James-themed billboards in the run-up to free agency.

“I definitely didn’t think it was going to be something where we missed the playoffs or thought, ‘What the hell is happening here?’ ” Emrani said in an interview. “I’m disappointed in the breaks we got, but I’m not necessarily disappointed in LeBron. We were in fourth place when he went down.”

Emrani was referring to what may have been the season’s turning point: the Lakers’ ill-fated Christmas Day game against the Golden State Warriors, which James himself cited in a recent interview with Spectrum SportsNet, the Lakers’ broadcast partner. The Lakers were playing solid basketball at the time — in fact, they clobbered the Warriors to improve their record to 20-14 — but James injured his groin in the third quarter and wound up missing the next 17 games. The Lakers went into a tailspin without him.

“Disappointed in my body,” James told Spectrum SportsNet, adding: “Because I knew exactly where we were at that point. And we just were never able to get back from that.”

Once James returned, the team’s front office unsuccessfully tried to engineer a trade for another big star, the New Orleans Pelicans’ Anthony Davis — this, after James had told ESPN that it would be “amazing” to play alongside Davis.

The plan appeared to be to essentially trade away the rest of the team. The fallout was clear: Whatever fragile bonds that remained in the home locker room at Staples Center seemed to fray at the seams.

For many fans, it was impossible to dissociate James from the failed trade — James and Davis share an agent, Rich Paul — and much of the mess that followed.

“Nearly everyone on the roster was involved in those trade rumors,” Never said. “How can you really feel wanted if you think you’re going to be packing your locker the next day?”

As the losses mounted, so did the criticisms of James: that he appeared detached from his teammates, that basketball was secondary to his growing interest in his entertainment company, that his body was finally breaking down after so many years of athletic genius, that he was no longer capable of carrying a team to a title.

But in the 55 games that James did play this season, he was pretty good. He averaged 27.4 points, 8.5 rebounds and 8.3 assists a game while shooting 51 percent from the field. Besides, a long summer may benefit him after so many extended playoff runs.

“The only thing that was hard was that he got hurt,” Walton said late Tuesday night. “It takes time to build a relationship with somebody. But as our relationship grew and I got to see what it was like coaching him, it was great. And I believe if we could have stayed healthy, we would have had a very successful season. He’s an incredible player.”

For his part, James told Spectrum SportsNet that he wanted to use the summer to get his body back to “120 percent” ahead of training camp — even as he moonlights on the set of “Space Jam 2.” He has been adamant that his work in entertainment will not interfere with his work on the basketball court.

The question is whether one bad season will become two. So much hinges on the summer as the Lakers look to add another star to their roster. (Emrani said he had plans for more billboards, though he declined to say which top-tier free agents he would target.) James has said that he will be as involved in the team’s recruiting efforts as possible.

“I’m looking forward to seeing who jumps in the car with me and wants to take this ride to the top,” James said in his interview with Spectrum SportsNet. “I know what I bring to the game. I know my commitment to the game. I’ve never cheated the game, and throughout my career, it’s always given back to me.”

Back in Venice Beach, Never painted a new mural during the middle of the N.F.L. season, replacing LeBron James with Derwin James, a safety for the Los Angeles Chargers. The mural has been up for months, Never said, and no one has touched it.

An earlier version of this article misstated when LeBron James injured his groin during a game against the Golden State Warriors on Christmas Day. It was in the third quarter, not the first half.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

SACRAMENTO — The Boston Celtics were not in a good place when they boarded a plane bound for California on Sunday. They were coming off a home loss to the Houston Rockets that point guard Kyrie Irving punctuated by using a total of 43 words to answer nine questions in his postgame news conference.

At one point, he was asked whether he thought the team could cobble together some momentum on its West Coast trip.

“We’ll see,” he whispered.

Just one season removed from a run to the N.B.A.’s Eastern Conference finals, and seemingly improved by the re-addition of Gordon Hayward and the continued development of their young core, the Celtics were on the brink of falling apart. Any hope they still harbored of being a championship-ready team was as brittle as a toothpick.

But after some reflection and conversation, the Celtics regained a bit of their swagger with back-to-back wins this week against the Golden State Warriors and the Sacramento Kings. The Celtics will see if they can keep the good vibes going on Saturday against the Los Angeles Lakers, which is anything but certain, especially for Irving, whose season has been clouded by questions about his future with the team.

Such uncertainty does not make Irving unique in the modern N.B.A. — Kevin Durant of the Warriors and Kawhi Leonard of the Toronto Raptors are among the other stars who will weigh big decisions in free agency this summer — but the Celtics have let the noise affect them.

With the two wins this week improving their record to 40-26, the Celtics may be showing signs that they are finally, mercifully, learning how to cope.

“That long plane ride helped us out,” Irving said after Tuesday’s lopsided victory over the Warriors. “I’ll just say that. We needed it. We needed it. We were going to get to a point where we were just going to get tired of fighting each other, fighting the outside world when it doesn’t really matter. So we just wanted to come out here and play basketball.

“This is our sanctuary, and we have to do everything we can to protect it. We can’t let anyone infiltrate it.”

Irving, who missed Wednesday’s win against the Kings with a left thigh contusion, is averaging a team-leading 23.4 points a game along with 7 assists and 4.9 rebounds, both career highs. He is also shooting 49.5 percent from the field and 41.7 percent from 3-point range.

He also ranks among the N.B.A. leaders in mercurial behavior. He has been vague about the specific source of his discontent, but it may have something to do with his pending free agency.

Irving backed off an earlier pledge to re-sign with the Celtics after they struggled at the start of the season. In fact, during a trip to New York to play the Knicks on Feb. 1, he told a group of reporters in his own colorfully abrasive way that he did not owe anyone anything. The Knicks, of course, would be interested in signing Irving, a six-time All-Star who grew up in New Jersey and has a soft spot for Madison Square Garden.

Then came the All-Star break, and a clip of Irving and Durant having an inaudible conversation found its way to the internet, where an army of amateur lip readers tried to decode what they were saying. Worth noting: Irving and Durant are close friends. Also worth noting: The Knicks will have enough cap space this summer for two max contracts.

Irving refused to shed light on their chat, and said it was nobody’s business, which was his prerogative. But it had the general effect of using a napkin to mop up an oil spill.

Since then, Irving has been alluding to nefarious forces and the steep cost of celebrity, saying he hates the spotlight — even as he sells sneakers and moonlights as an actor. He reiterated his disdain this week after collecting 19 points and 11 assists against the Warriors, his 17th double-double this season.

“The business part of it is just what makes it terrible for me — honestly, dealing with all this,” he said, referring to the reporters around him. “I’m going to be honest with you guys: The basketball part of it? I have to keep that fun. That’s where I’m great. Being around my teammates, that’s what makes me happy. And the business part of it is going to be business.”

It was not lost on anyone who witnessed this exchange that Irving was bashing the business of basketball while wearing an Uncle Drew ball cap — the same Uncle Drew character he popularized in soft drink commercials and then parlayed into a movie released last year.

As for the basketball itself, well, Boston has had an uneven season, the product of a team that is not nearly Lakers-level dysfunctional but is not exactly cohesive, either. The Celtics arrived for their game against the Warriors having lost five of their last six games, and their locker room was a joyless place.

Perhaps they needed to get away from Boston. Perhaps they needed perspective. Perhaps Irving needed to speak with Danny Ainge, the team’s president of basketball operations, and Brad Stevens, its coach, who reminded Irving that the team still had a lot of season left to play. It was not over, not yet, not by any stretch.

“Every team has to find a togetherness in competing,” Stevens said. “Some teams, it takes 60 games. Some teams, it takes 20 games. And bad teams never get there. We hope that it took us 60 games, but we’ll see. We haven’t proven ourselves to be great at that yet for a long stretch of time.”

In their 128-95 win against the Warriors, the Celtics had 38 assists on 49 field goals. They also communicated. When Irving and forward Jaylen Brown botched a play that led to an early turnover, Brown patted himself on the chest to apologize, then appeared to apologize a second time on their next trip up the court.

The next night, in Sacramento, Irving sat behind the visiting bench for the Celtics’ 111-109 victory over the Kings. He was vocal. He did a lot of fist-pumping. And he celebrated when Hayward, less than 24 hours after scoring 30 points against the Warriors, connected on the game-winner.

After suffering a grisly ankle injury in the opening game and missing last season, Hayward has struggled to find a rhythm in his return. Maybe he found it here in California, along with the rest of the team. The Celtics are too talented to let this opportunity go to waste, because who knows how long it will last?

“As long as my teammates are feeling good,” Irving said, “then we’re in a good place.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Harvey Araton

The crush of bodies surrounding Dwyane Wade as he left an N.B.A. court for the last time as an active player had the effect of a small tidal wave, surging through the jammed Barclays Center tunnel, head-on into a pack of waiting well-wishers.

At the rear of the crowd stood Pat Riley, who brought Wade to Miami 16 years ago, nurtured him to stardom, celebrated three championships with him, let him get away in 2016 over a contract dispute and less than two years later welcomed him home with open arms.

“Whoa,” Riley said, hands on the shoulders of his wife, Chris, steadying her against the swell of humanity.

Now here, finally, came Wade, man of the hour. Wade and Riley, both standing 6 feet 4 inches, made eye contact. Riley raised his right arm forward. Wade reached above the security detail, clasping his hand with the team president’s. The linchpins of the Miami Heat franchise pulled together for a heartfelt embrace.

“One more,” Riley told Wade. “I’ve got a max contract for you.”

Wade snickered. Riley chortled. It was the self-mocking joke Riley could tell and they both could enjoy after Wade, having gone home again following unfulfilling detours to Chicago and Cleveland, was given the send-off he deserved.

After being traded back to Miami by the Cavaliers early last year, Wade talked himself into a last dance for the 2018-19 season, many nights of which he played younger than his well-worn 37 years. Properly feted before Miami’s home schedule closeout on Tuesday night, he scored 30 points in a victory over Philadelphia and topped it off with a playful triple double (25 points, 11 rebounds, 10 assists) as the Heat’s season ended 24 hours later with a 113-94 defeat to the playoff-bound Nets.

“I can retire and be happy about my career,” Wade would say, sporting a gold and black jacket in the interview room, on his way out to dance the night away with a guest list that included his N.B.A. “brotherhood” — LeBron James, Carmelo Anthony and Chris Paul.

However dapper at 74, with a fine head of combed-back gray hair, Riley was never part of that social scene, just the patriarch who landed Wade with the fifth pick of the 2003 draft, considered at the time to be a consolation prize after James, Darko Milicic, Anthony and Chris Bosh were the first four players chosen.

But Wade was more special than anyone imagined during his time at Marquette, a world-class gymnast in basketball footwear, with the uncommon calm of a cocksure gunslinger.

When Wade had moved on into the corridor leading to the locker room, I told Riley about a 2005 playoff night in Auburn Hills, Mich., when Wade, as a second-year player, was making life quite difficult for the defending champion, defensively stout Detroit Pistons in the Eastern Conference finals.

Taking a halftime stroll, I ran into Chuck Daly, who as the Pistons coach in the late 1980s had devised a defense specifically for Michael Jordan — the famous Jordan Rules.

“I’ll tell you what, he’s got some Jordan in him,” Daly said, dragging on a cigarette, when I asked what he thought of the young Wade. “He’s got all the things you can’t teach.”

Riley nodded. “Chuck was right,” he said.

Wade had other elite qualities besides the balletic ability to score from angles we couldn’t be sure actually existed. He could pass like a point guard when his team needed an assist. He was a solid team defender. He retires as the most productive shot-blocking guard in N.B.A. history, having last month nudged past Jordan.

Flashy as he was, Wade had some Tim Duncan in him, too. Until James arrived with Bosh in the summer of 2010, he was unquestionably the franchise star without having to broadcast it to the world, and his door was open to anyone who could give him a better chance to win.

Wade embraced Riley’s 2004 acquisition of Shaquille O’Neal when Kobe Bryant wanted no part of the big fella in Los Angeles. He recruited James while fully aware of how the self-proclaimed King was great at basketball, as well as sucking the oxygen out of an organization.

When James departed after two titles and four consecutive runs to the finals, Riley called it the most devastating blow of his time in Miami, but Wade insisted there were no hard feelings. It was business. He was still being paid to play basketball, live in Miami. How could life not be good?

Yet he wasn’t immune to wounded pride when Riley refused to give him a third contract year in 2016, citing Wade’s balky knees and declining stats. Wade left, reluctantly, one more divorce in a league of ever-transient stars.

There’s nothing wrong, nothing at all, with players maximizing free agency, leveraging their way to whichever location suits them at a certain career stage. James of course has been the pied piper of the paradigm. Kevin Durant is reportedly poised to again follow his lead, right out of Golden State.

But James’s presence in Brooklyn on Wednesday night, a convenient excuse to avoiding dealing with Magic Johnson’s sudden, stunning disappearance from the Lakers’ front office, was a reminder that the more moves a player makes, the better the odds he might eventually outmaneuver himself.

Meanwhile, Dirk Nowitzki, like Wade, was also demonstrating the currency in continuity, finishing a 21-year run Wednesday night with the Dallas Mavericks to widespread acclaim. Manu Ginobili and Duncan were similarly deified for staying the course in San Antonio. Wade will remain the toast of South Florida.

In the Miami locker room, a few young Heat players lined up for Wade to sign their jerseys and sneakers. The No. 3 jersey he wore was given to Anthony, a shooter without a squad after parting ways with Paul’s Houston Rockets this season after a mere 10 games.

Anthony did manage to scoop up a ball rolling out of bounds in the fourth quarter by the corner front row from where he, Paul and James were cheering on Wade. He took one dribble and, thankfully, resisted the temptation.

“I didn’t get a chance to play against Melo this season and exchange jerseys,” said Wade, explaining the gesture. “He was the missing piece.”

Throughout his career, wherever he lit up the scoreboard, Anthony seemed to miss the point, unwilling to — as former President Barack Obama said of Wade in a video tribute — “sometimes sacrifice your ego in pursuit of a title.”

If Anthony never plays again in the N.B.A., is there a moral to their divergent stories? Only if the most graceful departure possible is a priority, part of the plan. It apparently was for Wade. He left with a self-assured smile and, while indicating he would probably need therapy to deal with the time on his hands, he ruled out a potential return.

“I think everybody knows this is for real,” he said.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

HOUSTON — DeMarcus Cousins used to watch soap operas with his grandmother when he was growing up. She would refer to them as her “stories,” he said, and “As the World Turns” was her favorite. Cousins could never fully relate to the absurd drama of his grandmother’s stories until this season, when he joined the Golden State Warriors.

“Every episode it was something,” he said. “And that’s what this has turned into.”

Cousins is sometimes an innocent bystander. (Consider the midseason beef between Kevin Durant and Draymond Green that stemmed from a late-game meltdown against the Los Angeles Clippers and bled into Durant’s impending free agency.) But sometimes Cousins is involved, even if it is not his choice. He was aware, for example, before Wednesday’s game against the Houston Rockets, that members of the news media and the general public were picking apart his defense and referring to him as a liability.

“We all been in this business long enough to know how it goes,” said Cousins, a 6-foot-11 center. “And I’ve been around this team to know how things go around here. You’re always looking for something to make a story. I mean, I could care less. You all got to do your jobs, and I got to do mine.”

For all the laments about Cousins’s vulnerability in pick-and-roll defensive situations, there is no denying his offensive impact when he is focused, and he was supremely focused against the Rockets on Wednesday night, collecting 27 points, 8 rebounds and 7 assists in a 106-104 victory that infused the team with some positive vibes.

Scoring down low, passing out of the post, setting meaty screens — Cousins does things that the Warriors have seldom featured in their four-plus seasons of dominance.

“For as long as we can remember, we haven’t had a guy we can just throw the ball to in the post and work around him,” Stephen Curry said.

It is still a process, of course, both for the Warriors, who are working to incorporate another mammoth personality into their fold as they pursue a third straight championship, and for Cousins, a four-time All-Star who spent the first few months of the season building strength and working on his conditioning as he recovered from an Achilles’ tendon tear.

Since Cousins made his season debut on Jan. 18, the Warriors are 15-7. But they had lost six of their last 10 games entering Wednesday, and the general mood of the team felt flat. Curry likened it to when Durant joined the Warriors in 2016, and the team spent the first two or three months of the season trying to find its rhythm.

“There was a little sensitivity to how everybody was going to get their shots,” Curry said. “At the end of the day, we’re all talented and we all have high basketball I.Q.s, so just let things happen. You don’t have to force anything. We’ve been good at it at times, and not so good at other times. So it’s just a matter of sticking with the program.”

After sinking 11 of 16 shots against the Rockets, Cousins acknowledged that it was the best he had felt since he made his return.

“I think it’s coming,” Cousins said. “We’ve had stretches where it’s kind of flowing for everybody. But this is a team that’s been together for a while, and they’re used to playing a certain type of way. So for me to just come in — I’m not expecting this team to adjust to me. Obviously, I have to adjust to them.”

Durant missed the game with a sprained ankle, which meant that Cousins had more playmaking opportunities than usual. Coach Steve Kerr made some adjustments, too, staggering Cousins and Green for stretches so that each had more room to operate in the middle of the court. Kerr has also been advising his players to pump the brakes in transition.

“Sometimes we’ve played a little too fast and shot too many quick shots instead of letting him get down on the block and controlling things,” Kerr said, referring to Cousins. He added: “I think we’ve got to remind ourselves that this is still early in the process. We’re all learning. Me too. I’ve got to learn to use him better.”

If Cousins still appears to labor at times (or most of the time) to get overly airborne, his confidence seems fine.

“I don’t think anyone can stop me one on one, period,” he said. “So you can put whoever you want on me.”

The Warriors and the Rockets have history. In last season’s Western Conference finals, Houston had a 3-2 series lead against Golden State, but Chris Paul injured his hamstring in Game 5. The Rockets lost the final two games of the series without him, and the Warriors went on to successfully defend their N.B.A. championship.

Cousins was not involved in that series, but he is a part of the dynamic now — and the Warriors are not quite finished preparing themselves for the postseason. Andrew Bogut, a defense-minded center who last played for Golden State in 2016, is expected to join the team in the coming days after an M.V.P. season with the Sydney Kings of Australia’s National Basketball League. Kerr recently described Bogut as “an insurance policy in the frontcourt.”

Yes, the league’s most compelling drama is about to welcome the return of a former cast member. For his part, Cousins said he would continue to focus on the only role he knows.

“I just want to play basketball,” he said.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Scott Cacciola

Kenny Anderson, a celebrated point guard from Queens who had a 14-year N.B.A. career, was hospitalized over the weekend after suffering a stroke.

Lina Catalfamo Plath, a family spokeswoman, said via email that Anderson was recovering. Plath also released a statement from Anderson’s wife, Natasha.

“We would like to thank everyone for reaching out on behalf of Kenny,” Natasha Anderson said in the statement. “Our family is extremely grateful for all the prayers and love that we have received over the last few days. We appreciate you continuing to respect our privacy as Kenny heals.”

Anderson, 48, recently concluded his first season as the men’s basketball coach at Fisk University, a historically black school in Nashville that plays at the N.A.I.A. level.

As a high school player at Archbishop Molloy, a powerhouse program in Queens, Anderson was one of the most prolific and high-profile players in the city’s rich basketball history. A McDonald’s All-American, Anderson set what was then a state scoring record with 2,621 points before enrolling at Georgia Tech, where he helped the team reach the Final Four in 1990.

After Anderson spent two seasons at Georgia Tech, the New Jersey Nets made him the second overall pick in the 1991 N.B.A. draft — Larry Johnson went first to the Charlotte Hornets — and Anderson enjoyed a productive career that never quite lived up to the hype that had followed him since he was a teenager. He averaged 12.6 points and 6.1 assists a game while playing for nine teams, including the Boston Celtics and the Portland Trail Blazers, and was an All-Star selection for the Nets in 1994.

A 2017 documentary on Anderson called “Mr. Chibbs” detailed many of his personal struggles, including bankruptcy and depression. In 2014, he traveled to North Korea as a member of the team that Dennis Rodman, the former Chicago Bulls forward, cobbled together at the invitation of Kim Jong-un, the country’s leader.

“My mistakes weren’t really mistakes,” Anderson said in an interview with The New York Times in 2011. “It was being young and living and learning. Yes, I spent a lot of money; I went through a lot of money. I had some failed marriages — if you want to criticize me for that. You can’t cry about your mishaps. I count my blessings, I don’t count my mishaps.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Victor Mather

Mike Bibby, the former N.B.A. player, is being investigated by the police over accusations of sexual abuse.

Mr. Bibby, now a high school basketball coach in Arizona, was accused by a teacher who works at the same school, The Arizona Republic reported. The episode that prompted the accusations was said to have taken place in 2017.

The Republic, citing a restraining order granted last week, said that Mr. Bibby had been accused of grabbing the teacher by the waist and pulling her into a car, then groping her and rubbing his genitals on her. After the woman left the car, the order said, he followed her and made sexual remarks. The woman said she did not know Mr. Bibby before the incident.

The restraining order quoted the teacher as saying she was “in shock, in fear, intimidated by his actions, afraid of him as he smelled of alcohol.”

A lawyer for Mr. Bibby denied the accusations.

“I can say with pretty much certainty this alleged incident didn’t happen and that will be shown down the road,” Donald Harris, Mr. Bibby’s lawyer, told The Republic. “Michael Bibby did not participate in a sexual assault of any way, shape or form that was alleged by this lady two years ago.”

Mr. Bibby recently coached the boys’ basketball team to a fourth straight state championship at the school, Shadow Mountain High in Phoenix. He is also an alumnus of Shadow Mountain, and won a state championship as a player in the 1990s before attending the University of Arizona, where he won a national championship in 1997. He retired from the N.B.A. in 2012 after a 14-year career with six teams, most notably the Vancouver Grizzlies, Sacramento Kings and Atlanta Hawks. He spent his last season with the Knicks, playing 39 games after signing as a free agent in December 2011.

For the past two summers, Mr. Bibby, 40, played with the Ghost Ballers of the Big3, a professional 3-on-3 basketball league founded by the rapper Ice Cube.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Stein

DENVER — There was a time not long ago that basketball success in the Rocky Mountains was measured by the Denver Nuggets’ ability to persuade a free agent of Dwyane Wade’s stature to meet team brass in New York and let the Nuggets offer him millions.

In the summer of 2016, only one season into the career of Nikola Jokic and with few hints to that point that the Nuggets already had a cornerstone player, just getting the opportunity to pitch Wade face-to-face was widely hailed as a triumph for this franchise.

What went unrevealed that off-season was that Denver also made a futile run at Wade’s longtime rival, Dirk Nowitzki of the Dallas Mavericks. Nowitzki had no interest in even entertaining the idea of leaving the only team he had ever known, but that was the Nuggets in the embryonic stages of Jokic’s development — straining to persuade some of the game’s biggest names to take them seriously.

Three years later, Jokic is a certifiable All-Star and his team of upstarts from the Mile High City found an entertaining way on Tuesday night to win some leaguewide notice. Seemingly headed for a second consecutive playoff defeat to the San Antonio Spurs on its home floor, Denver rode a remarkable fourth-quarter resurrection from the third-year guard Jamal Murray to rally to a 114-105 victory over the Spurs that did far more than even this Western Conference first-round series at one game apiece.

“Definitely saved the season,” Paul Millsap, Denver’s veteran forward, said in a quiet moment at his locker. “To go down, 0-2, against the San Antonio Spurs, going into their place, it’s a massacre waiting to happen.”

Millsap’s candor conveyed a good chunk of the significance attached to this win, but not all of it. Murray’s eruption for 21 of his 24 points in the final period — on 8-for-9 shooting after he stood at 0-for-8 through three quarters — not only gave the hosts hope of making this an actual series but also spared them some real embarrassment and introspection.

After five consecutive seasons out of the playoffs, Denver unexpectedly won 54 games this season to vault to No. 2 in the West. The Nuggets were nonetheless a trendy pick to suffer a first-round upset against the San Antonio masters of execution and their coaching maestro, Gregg Popovich, which would naturally render Denver’s regular-season accomplishments rather hollow.

“Frauds” was the popular word being tossed around on N.B.A. Twitter after the Nuggets fell behind by 19 points — twice — in a must-win game. Booing broke out at Pepsi Center on multiple occasions in just Denver’s second home playoff game since 2013, with both Jokic and Nuggets Coach Michael Malone telling reporters afterward that the fans were too hard on Will Barton when they hissed at his 1-for-10 shooting.

“When they’re going through a tough time, they could use some love,” Malone said of his players, who comprise the league’s youngest playoff roster.

Fortunately for Barton and the rest of the Nuggets, it was all love in the fourth quarter, thanks largely to Murray, who shot 8-for-24 in Game 1 — including a wide-open elbow jumper he clanked in crunchtime that clearly haunted the Canadian guard well into Game 2.

During one key timeout, Malone reminded his players “what the Clippers did” Monday night, when they rallied out of a 31-point deficit in the second half at Golden State to register the largest playoff comeback in N.B.A. history. The inspiration finally hit Murray in the fourth when, without warning, he drained his first eight shots.

In support of Murray, Jokic rang up 21 points, 13 rebounds and 8 assists in a bid for a second consecutive triple-double, which would suggest that the Serbian big man is coping quite well with his first turn under a playoff microscope. Gary Harris and Millsap added 23 and 20 points, to give Denver four starters in the 20s.

“We gave up 38 points in the fourth quarter,” said a seething Popovich. “End of story.”

The collapse was even worse than Popovich realized. The Spurs actually allowed 39 points in the quarter — and San Antonio’s All-Star forward, LaMarcus Aldridge, could be subjected to some league discipline that affects his status for Thursday night’s Game 3 judging by video footage in circulation that appears to show Aldridge landing a below-the-belt shot on Harris.

Not that the Nuggets, after days of hearing incessantly about how inexperienced they are, can feel any sort of comfort yet. They’ve lost 13 consecutive games in San Antonio dating to 2012. Denver is also 0-11, as a franchise, in best-of-seven series after losing Game 1.

“I think the cynicism is fair,” Nuggets General Manager Tim Connelly said after the victory, acknowledging that he was well aware of the noise about his team.

Yet Connelly pointed out that as fluky as skeptics might find the Nuggets’ No. 2 seed, team officials set three fairly lofty goals before the season started. Then they watched this group, largely assembled through Denver’s own shrewd drafting and trading, reach them all.

End the playoff drought? Check.

Win the Northwest Division? Check.

Secure a top-four seed and home-court advantage in the first round of the postseason?

Check.

The next step was making sure they didn’t spoil all that by falling into an 0-2 hole to San Antonio with two home defeats, which is the sort of deficit only four teams in league history have managed to erase. Yet one of the more refreshing things about this team is that it doesn’t try to pretend that its collective lack of postseason experience is merely a topic harped on by the news media.

The Nuggets have only three players (Millsap, Barton and Mason Plumlee) who appeared in a playoff game before Game 1 of this series, and they acknowledge it’s an obstacle, especially against a team that can carry out a game plan like the Spurs.

“Yes, playoff basketball is everything everybody says it is,” Harris told me Monday, on the eve of Game 2.

Breakthrough performances from Murray and Jokic and big comebacks, as such, must be celebrated — even at this early stage of Round 1.

So in the middle of the victorious locker room, swept up in what the novices, er, the Nuggets had just achieved, Malone was duly pulled into a robust group hug by their rarely seen owner, Stan Kroenke, and Kroenke’s son Josh, the team’s president and governor.

“It was fun,” Connelly said, “to watch some young guys grow up tonight.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Richard Goldstein

Cal Ramsey, a presence on the New York basketball scene for more than a half-century, who starred at New York University in the 1950s, played briefly for the Knicks and remained with them as a longtime broadcaster and community relations representative, died on Monday in Manhattan. He was 81.

The Knicks announced his death, at a rehabilitation center. He had been in poor health in recent years.

Ramsey, who had lived in Harlem since he was young, began honing his skills on the playground courts of the Rucker League, which has attracted some of the game’s greatest players over the years.

He first appeared at Madison Square Garden while playing for Commerce High School of Manhattan. He played at the Garden for three seasons as a forward at N.Y.U., where he was a teammate of the future Boston Celtic forward Tom Sanders. He is 11th on the leading scorers list for N.Y.U. with 1,275 points.

Ramsey was selected in the second round of the 1959 N.B.A. draft by the St. Louis Hawks. At 6 feet 4 inches, he was an outstanding rebounder with a good shooting touch, but he came to be considered too small as a forward and not good enough as a dribbler to excel at guard.

He played in only four games with the Hawks and seven with the Knicks in the 1959-60 season, then in two games with the Syracuse Nationals, the forerunners of the Philadelphia 76ers, in 1960-61.

Ramsey may have faced another obstacle in the N.B.A. that had little to do with his skills. “I’ve been told at the time there was a quota system in the league,” in which teams “may have wanted only two or three blacks,” Ramsey told Charles Salzberg for the oral history “From Set Shot to Slam Dunk” (1987).

After Ramsey’s stint with Syracuse, he went to the semipro Eastern League but incurred a severe knee injury in his third season with the circuit. It ended his playing career.

Ramsey was born on July 13, 1937, in Selma, Ala. He was a teacher in New York after his playing days, having received a bachelor’s degree from N.Y.U.

He was a color analyst for Knicks broadcasts from 1972 to 1982, then rejoined the team as a community representative in 1991. He was also an assistant basketball coach at N.Y.U., which had become a Division III team, from 1983 until the past season. He served N.Y.U. as assistant director of community relations for 20 years and received the N.Y.U. President’s Alumni Achievement Award in 2004.

Information on his survivors was not immediately available.

James L. Dolan, the Knicks’ owner, said in a statement that Ramsey “will be remembered for the thousands of young lives he influenced as a community leader.”

A case in point involved Al Barden, who, after starring for Boys High School in Brooklyn (now Boys and Girls), was recruited to N.Y.U. by Ramsey while he was playing there.

“Al was a tough kid with a habit of getting into some trouble,” Ramsey told Harvey Araton of The New York Times in 2009. “So I stayed on him, made sure he was going to class, doing the things he needed to stay eligible.”

When Barden’s basketball career was over, Ramsey, mindful of the problems athletes have in transitioning to a new phase of life, hired Barden as his replacement to direct a high school program for at-risk students. They remained friends through the years.

One day, Barden, living in California, phoned Ramsey to tell him of the birth of his son, whom he had named Ramses, ostensibly for the pharaohs of ancient Egypt as a symbol of everlasting strength.

But there was more to it than that.

“Replace the ‘s’ with a ‘y’ and what does it spell?” Barden asked Ramsey. “I really named him for you.”

In June 2009, the Giants selected Ramses Barden, a receiver from Cal Poly, in the third round of the N.F.L. draft, and he spent four seasons with them.

When Ramses was drafted, Al Barden, speaking to The Times, said of Cal Ramsey, “He could get you to do anything just because of who he was: someone you just had to respect.”

An earlier version of a picture caption with this obituary misidentified when Ramsey played for the Knicks. As the obituary correctly states, it was the 1959-60 season, not 1960-61.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Peter S. Goodman

LONDON — In theory at least, we understand the words on the sports radio we hear incessantly — in taxis, at the fish and chips place, at the corner newsstand. But we are foreigners here and the stories are inscrutable, full of happenings from cricket ovals and rugby pitches.

Our sports focus is confined to our darkened living room, where my 7-year-old son, Leo, and I have lately been absorbing improbable happenings from the other side of the Atlantic — one exhilarating victory after another for our suddenly mighty Brooklyn Nets.

This has become our early-morning ritual. Wife and daughter still asleep, the boys watch the action from the night before, the scores carefully hidden from our N.B.A. League Pass app lest we ruin the ending.

We are basketball expatriates, two steps removed from the initial source of my N.B.A. obsession by a change of team loyalties and a move to London.

In our North London surroundings, we may as well be rooting for a badminton team from Bhutan. While the odd LeBron James jersey can be spotted, our Brooklyn Nets gear seemingly fades into the sea of Yankees caps brought home by tourists returning from New York (oblivious to the hate they are inspiring from this Mets fan) and the endless Brooklyn-related mumbo jumbo that now adorns T-shirts worldwide.

[Nets’ Run to the Playoffs Hits a Snag With Spencer Dinwiddie Injury]

While N.F.L. gear is a common sighting, owing to the constant staging of American football games here, N.B.A. basketball is largely invisible. One imagines this was unaltered by the recent showdown of two of the league’s most dreadful teams, the Knicks and the Washington Wizards, inside London’s unlovable O2 arena. (We did not attend, just as we do not take leisure trips to see the dentist.)

Our sports-related conversations with Britons tend to revolve around the astronomical ticket prices required to see Arsenal, the English Premier League soccer team Leo has decided that we love forever. Our Nets fandom is like membership in a secret society, whose disclosure would mark us as eccentric and produce puzzlement.

Even my Knick fan friends back in New York do not want to hear about the Nets via email. My only real communion comes via obscure Nets-related podcasts I listen to while washing the dishes. When Bill Simmons and Zach Lowe devoted perhaps 3 minutes of a recent pod to the Nets surge, I confess to feelings of pride and validation I can only liken to a U.F.O. conspiracy theorist hearing that the government is probing the sighting of a flying saucer.

My embrace of the Nets began seven years ago when the Knicks — the only team I had ever rooted for — shunned a gift from the basketball gods by letting Jeremy Lin leave town. It was the final indignity after years of atrocious basketball. I dumped my Knicks season tickets and adopted the fledgling club whose arena had just risen over my Brooklyn neighborhood.

I did not do so lightly. As a born-and-bred New Yorker, I saw abandoning a team as a serious breach of the tribal code. I disdained fans from other cities who rooted for two teams in the same sport. I was unremittingly harsh to the worst transgressor of all: the bandwagon fan. (If that Steph Curry jersey you own was the first Warriors gear in your closet, yes, I’m talking about you.)

But I was hopping on no bandwagon. With the exception of a pair of distant trips to the N.B.A. finals, the New Jersey-turned-Brooklyn Nets were a pathetic franchise. I was living in Brooklyn. My father had grown up in Queens and traveled on a streetcar to watch the Dodgers at Ebbets Field. I was not abandoning my tribe. I was returning to it.

This is what I told myself as I began reading about the odd collection of players I was now rooting for, trying to divine the narrative that would make it real. I fought through a sense of exile in the slick, new Barclays Center, which was full of fans for whom the game itself appeared peripheral to the cool Brooklyn food, the dancing during timeouts, and whatever fascinating things were happening on their phones.

Yes, it was a gorgeous arena with excellent sightlines and welcoming staff. The season tickets I bought the day the Knicks said goodbye to J-Lin put me in seats that were a 10-minute walk from my house in Prospect Heights. Madison Square Garden was a cramped dump reached via a creaking subway and a walk through the bowels of Penn Station.

Yet there was something about the Garden, even as the Dolan era yielded a lost decade of basketball. The crowd understood. Hustle plays drew appreciation in an arena that had revered Charles Oakley. The energy was electric.

In Brooklyn, the mostly mercenary fans got what we deserved: a team of past-their-prime castoffs imported by the bombastic Russian magnate, Mikhail Prokhorov, who had brought the franchise to Brooklyn. Vowing to spend whatever it took to eclipse the Knicks — a low bar — he built a bonfire of money at the corner of Flatbush and Atlantic.

In came the wildly overpaid Joe Johnson, a seven-time All-Star. In came the mediocre Gerald Wallace in exchange for a first-round pick that Portland turned into Damian Lillard. The centerpiece was the sullen, out-of-shape Deron Williams who, in another lifetime, looked like the best point guard on earth, and whose passions no longer appeared to include basketball.

They fit uneasily around the likable 7-footer, Brook Lopez, whose sweet shooting came along with rebounding and defensive skills that seemed better suited for other pursuits, like calligraphy.

My history as a Knicks fan made the plan feel familiar. Win now, baby! The future was for losers. The oligarch was buying his way to competitiveness pronto. Leaving no doubt, the Nets soon traded every first-round pick until the sun dies for the remains of Paul Pierce and Kevin Garnett.

When it all unraveled and the Nets descended into an unwatchable state, I hung in. You can not renounce the team of your life and then walk away from your new one because they are terrible. Real fandom is forged in suffering. Even when my family traded Brooklyn for London in 2016, we remained Nets fans.

This happily coincided with another development: The Nets bucked the conventional wisdom that New York fans will not accept rebuilding and embraced patience.

Sean Marks, the general manager, somehow turned a collection of mostly indifferent veterans into a raffish crew of young, hungry players led by a first-time head coach, Kenny Atkinson. They run at a ferocious pace, share the ball with grace, and play with joy.

Since an excruciating eight-game losing streak, the Nets have won 18 of 23. Even from afar, we can tell that the intensity has changed at the Barclays, the Brooook-Lyyyyn chants filling our London living room.

And still, an intense New York team deserves better. Back for the holidays, I took Leo to see New Orleans and their marquee star, Anthony Davis, at Barclays. The place was packed with tourists who seemed intent on taking selfies and buying Brooklyn gear at the swag shop.

Whatever.

On Saturday morning, we will sit on the couch in our pajamas, Leo and me, and see what happened against the now-hated, if pitiful, Knicks the night before.

Please don’t tell us who won.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Tracy

Louisiana State suspended its head men’s basketball coach, Will Wade, on Friday — less than two weeks before the N.C.A.A. tournament is set to begin — after a report that Wade made damning remarks to a recruiting middleman on a phone call that was wiretapped as part of a federal corruption investigation.

Wade spoke with Christian Dawkins, who was convicted of fraud last year for his connection in a scheme to funnel money to the families of basketball recruits, in violation of N.C.A.A. rules. In the conversation, according to a report on Thursday by Yahoo Sports, Wade was heard boasting in colorful language that he had made a strong offer to one recruit but that he had not yet committed because someone else in his life was not getting “enough piece of the pie in the deal.”

A source with knowledge of the call, who declined to be identified because the trial is continuing, confirmed the report on Friday.

The No. 10 Tigers (25-5) are having their best season in decades and are considered shoo-ins for an N.C.A.A. tournament bid. They host Vanderbilt on Saturday night before next week’s Southeastern Conference tournament in Nashville.

“All of us at L.S.U. share the obligation to protect the integrity of this institution,” said the university’s president, F. King Alexander, and its athletic director, Joe Alleva, in a statement. “As such, we have suspended Head Coach Will Wade indefinitely until such time as we can ensure full compliance with the N.C.A.A., as well as institutional policies and standards.”

Alexander and Alleva pledged full cooperation with the N.C.A.A. and said an assistant coach, Tony Benford, would be interim head coach.

When confronted with the report on Thursday by a local television station, Wade declined to comment.

Dawkins was convicted of fraud after a trial last year, alongside Jim Gatto, the former director of global sports marketing for Adidas, and Merl Code Jr., who had also worked for Adidas. After a yearslong investigation involving a cooperating witness, undercover agents and wiretaps, prosecutors said the men had conspired to funnel Adidas money to the family of a top basketball player who would play for Louisville, one of the most prominent teams the apparel giant sponsors.

But prosecutors also accused Dawkins and Code of involvement in bribing assistant coaches at top programs. In a trial set to begin next month, three assistant coaches have pleaded guilty, but Dawkins and Code are also defendants and, following sentencing in the first trial on Tuesday, their lawyers pledged to fight prosecutors on the facts and summon college coaches to testify.

When the charges were first announced, in September 2017, they swiftly led to the firings of Louisville’s athletic director and Hall of Fame coach, Rick Pitino. Several assistant coaches charged also lost their jobs. Arizona Coach Sean Miller was suspended for a game after a report that he was on tape discussing with Dawkins the payment of $100,000 to a top recruit, but he and the university denied the charge and he was reinstated. Evidence at last year’s trial indicated that Miller did have phone calls with Dawkins.

“The information in recent news reports is very disturbing, if true,” the SEC commissioner, Greg Sankey, said in a statement on Friday. “Considering the existing circumstances, L.S.U. has taken appropriate action today while the investigation continues.”

An earlier version of this article misstated the name of the president of Louisiana State University. He is F. King Alexander, not F. Alexander King.

Billy Witz contributed reporting.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Kevin Draper

An Alabama girl’s banishment from high school basketball came to an end on Friday morning when a circuit court judge accomplished what appeals to state boards and outcries from some of the most prominent voices in sports could not.

After the parents of Maori Davenport filed a motion on Thursday to get their daughter back on the basketball court, Judge Sonny Reagan of Pike County Circuit Court ruled that Davenport could return to competition pending a hearing. He will decide whether she deserved to be ruled ineligible for accepting a mistaken payment from the sport’s national governing body for playing on a junior national team last summer.

The effect will be almost immediate. Davenport, 18, a star forward at Charles Henderson High School in Troy, Ala., was set to play with her team on Friday night against Carroll High School.

Last season, Davenport averaged 18.2 points, 12.2 rebounds and 5.2 blocks a game in leading Charles Henderson to the Alabama Class 5A state title. The year before, in a losing effort in the state title game, she had 20 points and 25 rebounds and swatted away 19 shots, an Alabama state record. She has committed to play at Rutgers.

Her athletic eligibility became a cause célèbre in the past week. On Nov. 30, Davenport, a 6-foot-4 forward, was called into her principal’s office and told that the Alabama High School Athletic Association had ruled her ineligible for one year, her senior season.

The suspension was not for poor grades or unsportsmanlike conduct. It was because of a clerical error that U.S.A. Basketball, the sport’s national governing body, readily admitted to having made, and the decision to suspend her became one of the more mind-boggling stories for those who follow amateur sports.

“That was very heartbreaking for me,” Davenport said this week of the suspension. “The only thing I could think is that I was in shock and devastated.”

The trouble began harmlessly enough over the summer, when Davenport represented the United States at the FIBA Under-18 Women’s Americas Championship in Mexico City. She led the team in rebounding and blocks as it won gold.

U.S.A. Basketball compensates players who compete on national teams to make up for wages they could have earned working summer jobs rather than practicing or competing. The N.C.A.A. allows college athletes to accept those payments. It calls them broken-time payments.

For players with high school eligibility remaining, U.S.A. Basketball typically inquires with individual state high school athletics associations to see if the payments can be accepted. Policies can vary by state.

In this case, because of what Craig Miller, a spokesman for U.S.A. Basketball, termed a clerical error, nobody checked with the state high school athletic associations for the three players on the under-18 team with high school eligibility remaining. U.S.A. Basketball sent checks for $857.20 to Davenport and every other player on the team. On Aug. 27, Mario Davenport, Maori’s father, received it. Two days later, she cashed it.

Two months later, U.S.A. Basketball realized the error. In November, an employee called the Alabama athletics association, which told the U.S.A. Basketball employee that under Alabama rules, athletes could accept broken-time payments only if the value was less than $200. On Nov. 26, a U.S.A. Basketball official called Davenport’s mother, Tara Davenport, and informed her that Maori was not allowed to accept the stipend. The next day, Tara Davenport reported the violation to the state association and informed Charles Henderson High School officials, and on Nov. 28 she repaid U.S.A. Basketball.

Two days later, the state ruled Davenport ineligible for the rest of the season. Two appeals boards have upheld the ruling.

On Wednesday afternoon, Tara Davenport said she hoped attention from the news media, as well as pressure from Alabama politicians, would convince the association to change the ruling. The Alabama House Republican Caucus unanimously approved a resolution supporting Maori Davenport, and its members were among the many local politicians supporting her. If the association’s officials were unwilling to change their ruling, Tara Davenport was prepared to take the next step.

“If they don’t, we are definitely going to take some legal action to try to help get her on the court,” she said. The next day, she and Mario Davenport filed a lawsuit in Pike County Circuit Court seeking their daughter’s reinstatement.

Since Maori Davenport’s final appeal was denied in December, attention and pressure had been building.

The story gained national attention recently after Jay Bilas, an ESPN college basketball analyst who was once called “the N.C.A.A.’s most dangerous critic,” wrote a column blistering Steve Savarese, the executive director for the state athletic association. Bilas accused Savarese of “blindly asserting authority without regard for whom it may hurt, or the reasonable likelihood of a similar issue recurring in the future.” On Thursday, the tennis legend Billie Jean King joined the N.B.A. star DeMarcus Cousins and a chorus of others in voicing their support for the player.

The association did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the judge’s ruling, and earlier in the week it declined to make Savarese available for an interview. On Tuesday, Johnny Hardin, the president of the association’s Central Board of Control — which heard and denied Davenport’s final appeal — released a statement asserting that “facts involved in the ruling have either been misstated or ignored.”

According to Brock Kelley, the Charles Henderson High School principal, it is the association’s facts that are misleading.

Hardin’s statement says that Tara Davenport is a certified basketball coach and therefore should know the eligibility rules. Kelley wrote in an email that Tara Davenport, who is a fifth-grade teacher, coaches middle school basketball, for which there is no rules test. Hardin’s statement says Kelley has not attended an association rules conference for the past three years. Kelley wrote that his school’s athletic director had attended each one and that the amateurism rule had not been covered at the last meeting.

Tara Davenport emphasized that neither she nor her daughter had hidden the check. They simply thought that U.S.A. Basketball had done its due diligence and that they could accept it.

“I reported it as soon as I knew that Maori wasn’t supposed to have it,” she said.

Kelley, the high school principal, and Miller, the U.S.A. Basketball spokesman, focused on how institutionalized the payments are. After U.S.A. Basketball sent the check but before Tara Davenport received it, Kelley wrote, she received a call from Jeff Walz. Walz is the women’s basketball coach at the University of Louisville and was also the coach of the United States under-18 team. Walz asked Tara Davenport if she had received the check yet. She said she had not and asked whether Maori could accept it. Walz told her that she was allowed to and that it was permitted by the N.C.A.A.

Louisville officials did not respond to a request to comment.

In Maori Davenport’s absence, the Charles Henderson girls basketball team has won all but two games and is the top-ranked 5A team in the state. Davenport is attending school, going to practices and working on her game with an outside trainer. She said she was focusing on ball-handling skills and other drills that would allow her to play more as a wing.

On Friday night, she will get her first opportunity to show off those newly developed skills in a competitive game.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Alex Wong

Nathaniel Butler has been an N.B.A. senior photographer since 1984. Those were the days of shooting on film and developing photos in hotel rooms after games. Today, players text Butler as they arrive at the arena so he can be in position to capture a perfect arena entrance shot for them to post on Instagram.

The job isn’t what it used to be.

When Andrew D. Bernstein became an official N.B.A. photographer in 1986, he was continually thwarted in his attempts to get his camera into in-game huddles to capture the interactions between players and coaches. Pat Riley, who was the coach of the Los Angeles Lakers, made sure to obscure all viewpoints.

Halfway through the season, Riley asked Bernstein why he wanted to be in the huddle. People want to see what’s happening on the inside, Bernstein told Riley, who agreed to give Bernstein a chance. If you screw up, Riley said, you are never coming back.

More than three decades later, Bernstein is still photographing N.B.A. players, huddles and pretty much whatever he pleases as the league’s longest tenured senior photographer.

Photographers have long played a critical role in shaping narratives in a league defined by faces and moments. The most iconic posters are the finished works of the photographers who position themselves along the baseline each game, often contorting their bodies and forgetting about personal comfort to get closer and take countless snaps, in hopes of capturing a masterpiece.

In today’s N.B.A., they allow players to use those photographs as building blocks for their social media profiles. They have adapted to an ever-changing digital world that has presented new opportunities and a whole new set of challenges.

On game day, Butler uses a combination of tethered remotes and custom phone apps to operate any number of cameras in an arena.

He sends photographs to a team of editors in Secaucus, N.J., with the press of a button. In seconds, they can be published on the league’s official social media feeds and reach millions of people around the world.

Despite the technological advances, shooting an N.B.A. game can be more difficult than one would think. “A basketball game is a complex situation,” said Bruce Ely, the lead photographer of the Portland Trail Blazers. “There are a lot of moving parts.”

Like a fan’s arms waving across the frame just as Damian Lillard makes a 3-pointer. Or the leg of another player sneaking into the edge of the image, ruining a portrait. Another time, it might be a referee walking into a perfect shot.

Despite the challenges, some N.B.A. photographers do not consider it their most difficult assignment. Nelson Campana, who photographs the Raptors as an employee of Maple Leaf Sports and Entertainment, which owns the team, regularly shoots weddings as well. The pressure of game night is nothing compared with the responsibility of chronicling a couple’s special day.

“You have one night to make it right,” Campana said. “There’s a list of things you need to get, and you don’t get another chance. At a basketball game, you’re just hoping things happen.”

Some nights, there is too much happening at the same time. As the Oklahoma City Thunder eliminated the San Antonio Spurs in the 2016 playoffs, Butler had to make a split-second decision about what to photograph at the buzzer. He focused on Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook embracing, and then got a shot of Durant with Tim Duncan. He stayed with Durant afterward, but that meant missing a chance to capture Duncan walking off an N.B.A. court for the final time.

“Ideally,” Butler said, “I would like to be in two places at one time.”

While some players enjoy being on the other side of these photographers’ lenses, others say it is an adjustment. Aaron Gordon of the Orlando Magic first remembers being in front of a camera as a high schooler being interviewed after winning a basketball tournament.

“You have to live in a way where you’re O.K. with being seen,” Gordon said. “You’re always being watched these days.”

Because so many photos are being taken, players have to accept that they can control only so much of what is shared online.

“You want to nitpick every single picture,” said John Collins, a second-year forward with the Atlanta Hawks. “But it just can’t work that way. You can’t read everything about yourself and see every photo of yourself.”

To take more control over their visual narratives on social media, players are working with photographers to shoot them outside basketball arenas.

Cassy Athena is a professional photographer who has earned the trust of players around the league. Last season, at All-Star Weekend in Los Angeles, Athena followed Stephen Curry and his wife, Ayesha, for the entire weekend. She was also invited by Indiana Pacers guard Victor Oladipo to shoot him at New York Fashion Week in 2018.

Athena says it takes time to convince certain players of the value of her photographs.

“It’s not so much they don’t understand the importance of the moment,” she said. “It’s convincing them why they should share it with the world. When it clicks, you get guys who might not be the best N.B.A. player, but they use this” — meaning Instagram and professional photos — “to build their own brand and further their careers.”

Older, more established players worry less about their online persona but more about how the images carry a nostalgic value as their careers wind down.

“What photographers do may seem minute,” said Vince Carter, 42, who just ended his 21st season in the league. “But I’ve seen so many shots of the best moments of my career, and in some ways, they’ve helped me remember those moments.”

Many of these iconic images can now be seen on the Instagram pages of the photographers themselves. Bernstein said he was the last guy dragged kicking and screaming into the social media era. He now enjoys posting classic pictures for Throwback Thursday.

Butler adds watermarks to the photographs he posts on his feed because other accounts and publications will often publish them without giving him credit. But he recognizes the value of being online. “It opens you up to a whole other audience,” Butler said.

The rise of social media accounts means there are now more photographers at N.B.A. games. Butler prefers to use a camera lens that does not require him to be right in the face of players to capture them up close. In the modern era, he has noticed a lot of camera phones being shoved into players’ faces.

“There’s an etiquette that doesn’t exist anymore,” Butler said. “Not just in sports, but in society.”

Even though photographers want to capture every moment, some also realize that there are boundaries. A few months ago, Kyrie Irving and Durant had a private conversation at All-Star Weekend in Charlotte, N.C., which was captured on film. It was circulated online, and many believed the two were discussing their heavily rumored plans to join the Knicks together this summer.

“If I was a player, that would bother me,” Butler said. “You don’t have to document every second of their existence.”

Bernstein had a similar decision to make more than 30 years ago, during the 1988 N.B.A. finals, when he walked through the Lakers’ locker room after a loss and found Magic Johnson and Michael Cooper with their uniforms on, dejected as the showers were running around them.

It was a one-of-a-kind moment, but Bernstein opted against taking the photograph.

“That was their time,” Bernstein said. “That didn’t need to be documented. I have that picture in my mind, and that’s enough.”

An earlier version of this article described Nelson Campana’s job incorrectly. He photographs the Toronto Raptors as an employee of Maple Leaf Sports and Entertainment, which owns the team; he is not the team photographer.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Sports of The Times

By Michael Powell

Sometime in the third quarter, as the Philadelphia 76ers rained down 3-pointers like mortar shots and Ben Simmons, a giant point guard possessed of preternatural passing ability and a bricklayer’s touch, carved through the Nets, a thought occurred:

This was not the playoff homecoming of the Nets’ dreams.

The Nets tried but never really contended Thursday night. The men from Philadelphia simply had too much talent and too many big bodies on their way to a 2-1 first-round series lead, and that was a shame. Saddled with the worst attendance in the N.B.A. this season, Barclays Center in Brooklyn was packed to the gills with fans waving towels and hooting and yelling. The joint was packed and joyfully rocking.

The Nets are a pretty good pro hoops team in a city where terrible often rules the roost. Their coach, Kenny Atkinson, a likable and intelligent basketball lifer, took over a team that was expected to dwell in the cellar and won more games, 42, than it lost, 40, this season.

That was in contrast to the disaster masquerading as a basketball team at Madison Square Garden, where the Knicks’ management team crafted a grotesquely bad team that finished 17-65. (Losing no longer impresses because the Knicks have posted losing records in 15 of the last 18 years.) In a sign that God may have a strange sense of humor, those same Knicks are widely rumored to be a favorite to gain the services of the brilliant forward Kevin Durant, who can become a free agent this summer.

But enough about that other New York team.

After falling into a deep ditch under previous management, the Brooklyn Nets have executed a slow, steady rebuild, instilling discipline and a sense of Nets basketball, which is to say a fluid, slashing style that relies on small forwards and guards bolstered by lean, swift centers who block shots and rebound and run. Their general manager, Sean Marks, a former San Antonio Spurs assistant and executive, has picked up talented role players much as a fishmonger sorts through a barrel and plucks out tasty sea bass.

The Nets have a fine quartet of guards and small forwards, D’Angelo Russell and Spencer Dinwiddie, Joe Harris and Caris LeVert, creative players all, who can probe and find seams in defenses and stroke jump shots.

So this game on Thursday offered a chance to draw the measure of a Nets team rising more quickly than expected and of a Sixers team that hopes to compete for a championship. On that last point I walked away nursing doubts.

The Sixers for six years were an experimental laboratory, their former general manager Sam Hinkie occupying a reputational land between supposed genius and madman. They lost intentionally and insistently, and accumulated top draft picks, not the least the 6-foot-10 point guard Simmons and the splendidly talented big man Joel Embiid. Sixers ownership eventually discarded Hinkie. But that team now is expected to contend, and the current general manager made a series of trades toward that end this season.

Yet a week into playoff season, the engine of that 76ers machine is coughing. Embiid has come up with a chronically sore knee. That is a problem for any athlete, much less a 7-foot, 270-pound center. The assumption Thursday night was that he would play, an impression reinforced when Embiid took the court an hour before the game and shot around. He shot fadeaways and spun like a dervish and put up graceful hook shots.

Then minutes before tipoff, the 76ers’ coaches shook their heads. Nope, his knee was too sore. Embiid was sitting. That left the big man in a bad mood. Moments before the tip, as teammates walked over to dap him up and slap his back, Embiid could barely look at them or the court.

Simmons is no less talented, and perhaps more baffling. He is a brilliant athlete with stunning vision and dribbling ability. When he breaks swiftly into the open court, his passing takes on a sleight-of-hand quality, so quick that you notice the ball only as it lands in the hands of a teammate.

Alas, his shooting edges toward disastrous, and his confidence in it is sodden. Rather than put his hand under the ball, he puts it off to the side, his left elbow sticking out like a chicken wing. He practices his shooting before games with often unsightly results. On Thursday evening, he stood in the corner and took pass after pass from an assistant coach and shot and shot. He made, by my count, five baskets in 15 attempts. Then he took 3-point shots from the shoulder of the key, going 1 for 6.

You wanted to cover your eyes and suggest that maybe he should stick to layups. Yet by shooting layups and hook shots and dunks, he finished the game with 31 points and 9 assists.

He is the best fundamentally unsound player in the N.B.A. And you wonder how this still unformed 22-year-old star and a gimpy-knee center can stumble into the N.B.A. finals.

In a strange way, on this night, Embiid’s absence liberated his teammates. They shot 40 percent from 3-point range to the Nets’ 20 percent, and they outrebounded them, too.

If the 76ers have a playoff advantage, it may reside with their veteran talent, in particular Tobias Harris, Jimmy Butler and J.J. Redick. During a Nets run late in the third quarter, Philadelphia Coach Brett Brown called a timeout and drew up a play. Then you saw Redick stand up and start talking and pointing. Then Butler leaned in and interjected. Brown fell silent, then nodded in agreement. Fine, he said, we’ll run it differently.

As they walked out onto the court after the timeout, Butler and Redick kept talking, resembling two professors discussing a knotty physics problem. “That was pros talking to pros,” Brown said later.

The Nets are a young crew, not unduly burdened by egos and attitude. But they are not yet at a pros-talking-to-pros level. They are a promising troupe still in search of a leading man.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Kevin Draper, Stephanie Saul and Marc Tracy

The woman who has accused Virginia’s lieutenant governor, Justin E. Fairfax, of raping her said that a former N.B.A. player, Corey Maggette, raped her at Duke University 20 years ago and that school officials did not pursue the claim, according to a childhood friend of the woman and Facebook messages the woman exchanged with another friend.

Mr. Maggette, who attended Duke for one year, 1998-99, and reached the national championship game, played in the N.B.A. until 2013 and has since worked as a television analyst for Fox Sports.

Mr. Maggette denied the accusation through a spokesman Monday evening. “It has only been through media accounts and a statement from Meredith Watson’s lawyer that I first learned or heard of anything about these sexual assault allegations,” Mr. Maggette said in a statement. “I have never sexually assaulted anyone in my life and I completely and categorically deny any such charge.”

A spokeswoman for Fox Sports West, where Mr. Maggette is a basketball analyst, said in an email, “Fox Sports takes allegations of misconduct seriously, and we are looking into the matter. We have no further comment at this time.”

Nancy Erika Smith, the lawyer for the woman who accused Mr. Maggette and Mr. Fairfax, Meredith Watson, said in a statement Friday that Ms. Watson had been raped by a Duke basketball player during her sophomore year but did not name the player. Ms. Smith also said that Ms. Watson had reported her rape to an unspecified dean at the university, but that the dean had “discouraged her from pursuing the claim further.”

Duke has acknowledged it is investigating an allegation that a player raped the woman, but a spokesman for the university declined to comment on the identity of the player or the assertion that the university failed to act on the accusation.

“We are in the process of gathering information to determine what policies and procedures were in place during the time period in which these events are alleged to have occurred, and whether they were activated and followed,” said Michael Schoenfeld, a spokesman for Duke. “We are not able to provide further information or comment on any individual at this time.”

Years before Ms. Watson came forward as the second woman to publicly accuse Mr. Fairfax of sexual assault, inflaming a political crisis in Virginia, she told multiple friends that she had been raped by Mr. Maggette, according to one of those friends and Facebook messages exchanged with another.

R. Stanton Jones, a partner at the law firm Arnold & Porter in Washington who grew up with Ms. Watson in Baltimore, said she told him that she had been raped by Mr. Maggette. She told Mr. Jones about it while he and Ms. Watson were both home for the summer in 2001, he said.

“Meredith told me she had been raped twice at Duke,” Mr. Jones said. “And she told me that one of the men who raped her was the Duke basketball player Corey Maggette. That was a name I knew because I’m a basketball fan.”

Mr. Jones, who did not attend Duke, said he had not had much contact with Ms. Watson in the last decade “other than occasionally liking a Facebook post.” He said he was coming forward now because it “seemed like the right thing to do.”

The longtime coach of Duke’s men’s basketball team, Mike Krzyzewski, said after his team’s victory against Virginia on Saturday night that he had “no knowledge” of the situation and that he had learned of it only from news media reports Friday.

Karen Kessler, a spokeswoman for Ms. Watson, provided The New York Times with a Facebook message exchange between Ms. Watson and a friend from March 2017. Ms. Kessler declined to identify the friend, whose name was blacked out in the messages, and The Times was unable to independently verify the authenticity of the messages.

In the messages, Ms. Watson expressed disgust at a newspaper article written about Mr. Fairfax, who had already announced his bid for lieutenant governor. After the friend asked Ms. Watson whether she had reported the rape, Ms. Watson responded: “You know I didn’t report it after how the university responded when I reported Corey Maggette.”

Ms. Kessler said that after being discouraged by the dean, Ms. Watson decided not to report her accusation to the police.

Mr. Krzyzewski — who is in his 39th season coaching the Blue Devils and is college basketball’s leader in wins — and Duke have held themselves up not only as consummate winners but as moral exemplars.

No Duke player under Mr. Krzyzewski was kicked off the team until early 2015, when a player was dismissed for unspecified struggles to meet “necessary obligations.” The university’s student newspaper, The Duke Chronicle, reported that the player, Rasheed Sulaimon, had been accused of sexual assault by two students, allegations the athletics department had been aware of as early as 10 months before terminating his participation with the team. (Sulaimon was not charged, and later played for Maryland.)

Advertisement

He had become ‘that guy,’ the player left wide open during pickup basketball. So he enlisted the help of his 10-year-old son’s coach.

CreditCredit

Supported by

By Nik Mittal

Photographs and Video by Jonah Markowitz

I was 8 years old when my parents — both graduate students from India — moved from married student housing to a little home in Raleigh, N.C., with a basketball hoop in the backyard. Even as an immigrant from South Asia, I knew what that hoop meant.

Basketball is a religion in North Carolina, and I quickly became a disciple. When I was 11, the N.C. State Wolfpack won the N.C.A.A. championship in heart-stopping fashion. I still remember my dad taking me to the center of campus for the midnight celebration and being transfixed by the sheer size and emotion of it.

My love for the game soon became an obsession. I taught myself to shoot in the backyard and played against the neighborhood kids. I learned to make up for my disadvantages on the court — both real (I’m definitely undersized) and perceived (no one expected a short Indian kid to be any good) — through hustle and perfecting a low left-handed heave that I used whenever I could beat my man into the lane.

My crowning achievement came in the final seconds of a Little League championship game, when I went to the free-throw line with my team down a point. Both shots clanked around the rim but went in.

In college, watching the sport became equally addictive — especially now that I was at UNC-Chapel Hill. My senior year, the Tar Heels won their fourth N.C.A.A. Championship.

Now, at age 47, I am a New York City dad who watches Carolina basketball obsessively with his three sons and who, after a 15 year hiatus (thanks to a couple of knee surgeries) decided to play pickup again. But on the court recently, I came to a shocking realization.

My ugly but effective left-handed heave was no longer effective. I had become the player in the pickup game who everyone leaves open from a distance.

Call it ego, but I really didn’t want to be that guy. So I turned to the only expert I knew — my 10-year-old son’s basketball coach.

Macky Bergman, 35, runs Steady Buckets, a nonprofit that teaches more than 1,000 boys and girls from around the city. Coach Macky, as everyone calls him, is a product of New York City basketball — he was a star player at Bronx Science and played four years at the University of Rochester. He assured me that anyone could learn to shoot if they put the time in.

But could a middle-aged, undersized father of three really remake his jump shot and become a solid pickup basketball player again?

Coach Macky and I met in early October on a typical outdoor court — fenced-in blacktop, metal backboards, rims with no nets — on Second Avenue and 19th Street. It was 8 a.m. on a weekday, so the place was vacant, except for a grousing tenant who lived near the court and asked us to practice as far away from his home as possible. This somewhat safe space meant I could relax a little, although the pressure was still on, as both Macky and the Times photographer, sent to track my progress, were both former college players.

We began with a shooting test: a series of midrange and 3-point jumpers while moving between five spots on the court. I did this 10 times, shooting 10 free throws after each round. By the end I was drenched in sweat.

The results weren’t great — 62 percent from the free-throw line, 49 percent on 2-point jumpers and an abysmal 30 percent from the 3-point line. As for my self-taught shooting technique, which even my son, Kavi, had described as “pretty ugly,” Coach Macky decided we would have to start over from scratch.

In our first few sessions, we set about erasing the muscle memory of 1983 to develop proper form. We started as close to the basket as possible — almost directly under the rim.

The ball was to be perched just above my eyes, on the fingertips of my left hand, directly underneath the right angle at the bend of my elbow. My guide hand would hold the right side of the ball.

For my lower body: knees bent, feet shoulder-width apart, weight on the balls of my feet. Then I was to push the ball up — not out — release and follow through, fingers pointed down.

“On the follow-through, Kobe sometimes joins his thumb and index finger, and his guide hand points at the basket,” Macky would say. “Steph Curry’s guide hand flips out and his arms come together.”

The more shots I took — the goal was 100 baskets in a row — the more I could feel myself adapting. Set, shoot, follow-through. Take one step forward and catch the ball as it comes through the net. Repeat. It was surprisingly meditative. Before I knew it, I had made it all the way to 88 shots in a row.

But Macky had identified some weaknesses.

For one, I was landing with one leg practically a foot in front of the other. Macky had me stick a soccer ball between my legs and practice a series of jump shots while squeezing it between my knees.

This was surprisingly hard — either I’d brick the shot, or the soccer ball would pop out — until I focused on taking really small jumps, landing like I was on train tracks. Kavi even sort of complimented me, calling this an “advanced drill” that only the teenagers do.

Coach Macky encouraged me to attend his weekly shooting clinic at a high school on the Lower East Side with about two dozen of his other students. They were all between 8 and 14 years old, including my son.

I tried to blend in by standing with the coaches. That didn’t last long. When Macky assigned me to work with one of them, Torrence Ested, the first thing Coach Torrence said to me was, “I got you old man.”

When I asked Kavi who he thought was more embarrassed by the whole venture — me or him — his vague reply spoke volumes. “Tough to say,” he responded.

For the final lessons, Coach Macky moved me out to the 3-point line. I’d never been comfortable shooting the three. Because my old jump shot was a heave that began at the chest, it was all arms and no legs.

As it turned out, I’d been learning how to be a better 3-point shooter all along. Proper technique and good arc make for a more accurate shot, regardless of distance.

The difference was clear in my final set of drills. I shot above 70 percent from the free throw line, 65 percent on my two pointers, and a remarkably improved 55 percent from 3-point range.

But improving my stats was never really the point. I’ve started hooping again at the McBurney YMCA on West 14th Street and reconnecting with the sport I’ve loved since I was a kid practicing in the backyard. My jumper is still a work in progress, but I’m not being left wide open on it anymore.

At a recent pickup session — with adults, this time — I was shooting for the last spot in the next game and was matched against the best shooter in our group. We both made our first two free throws, but on the third shot his bounced out. Mine found the bottom of the net.

Not quite the Little League championship game, but I’ll take it.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Kelly Whiteside

As Nets guard Joe Harris walks the cobblestone streets outside the team’s practice facility in Sunset Park, no one seems to notice.

“Most of the time, I blend in,” he said. “I kind of look like I work in a Brooklyn coffee shop.”

Harris’s journey from unemployed castoff to indispensable starter mirrors the rise of the Nets, a team reconstructed through savvy draft picks and second-chance signings. Without a marquee star, the Nets have won 19 of their last 25 games, and they are on a six-game winning streak against opponents in the stronger Western Conference.

The Nets had 28 victories last season; now, despite a loss in Boston on Monday, they have the sixth-best record in the Eastern Conference (27-24), and playoff talk is brewing. The injury-riddled team has weathered the loss of Caris LeVert, out with a foot injury since November, and now is without Spencer Dinwiddie, a strong candidate for the Sixth Man of the Year Award, who may be out until mid-March with a thumb injury. In Dinwiddie’s absence, the next-man-up Nets will look to G League call-ups and increased scoring from everyone.

“I almost look at Joe as one of the poster boys for the Brooklyn Nets,” the veteran DeMarre Carroll said. “He came in, wasn’t really guaranteed his first year, got on the team, worked his butt off. Each year, he’s gotten better; his numbers, his play, his confidence proves it.”

Three years ago, Harris, then with the Cleveland Cavaliers, had the worst day of his basketball life. In a period of a few hours, he had foot surgery, was traded to Orlando and was immediately waived. He was out of the league for six months before the Nets signed him to a minimum contract for less than $1 million in 2016. Last summer, he signed a two-year, $16 million deal to remain with the Nets.

“His story is about opportunity and development on a team starting to improve,” Coach Kenny Atkinson said. “Given where he came from, it’s a romantic story, a beautiful story. Everything about him — his humility, the fact that he rides the subway everywhere — is why everybody loves Joe.”

Harris’s romance with the game began in Chelan, Wash., where his father coached high school basketball. In fourth grade, Harris came home one afternoon and asked his mother if he could write his basketball goals on his bedroom walls. She assumed he would scribble them on paper and tape them up. Instead, he took a marker and wrote directly on the walls and ceiling. The writings remain in his childhood bedroom, frozen in the amber of a 9-year-old’s penmanship.

Given that Chelan is a small town with only two gyms, the worst time of the year was when the courts were being refinished, leaving Harris nowhere to play. One time after an interminable wait, a 10-year-old Harris ran onto the court, slid on his stomach and kissed the floor. “Baby, I’m back!” he screamed.

“That pretty much sums me up as a kid,” Harris said. “I just love basketball.”

To the right of his childhood bed is his favorite quotation from John Wooden, which he easily recites from memory: “Success is a peace of mind which is a direct result of self-satisfaction in knowing that you did your best to become the best you are capable of becoming.”

There are also lines from Charles Barkley, Julius Erving, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Larry Bird and others, as well as a list of goals. The last goal on the list: “Become a pro.”

After playing four years at Virginia, Harris was drafted in the second round by Cleveland in 2014. He played sparingly for two seasons on the LeBron James-led Cavaliers. A few months after he was released, he watched Cleveland win its first N.B.A. title.

This season, Harris was averaging 13.4 points a game through Sunday and had the third-best 3-point shooting percentage in the N.B.A. (46.8 percent). Among players with at least 300 field-goal attempts this season, he was eighth at 61.4 in effective field-goal percentage, trailing only Golden State’s Stephen Curry (62.1) among guards and wing players, according to Basketball-Reference.com.

“We want him to shoot more bad shots because he’s such a great shooter, but he won’t because he’s such a good guy,” Atkinson said.

The pace-and-space era of the N.B.A. has made a player like Harris, a sharpshooter who creates space on the floor and strikes when opportunity arises, more valuable.

“The game has slowed down for him,” Atkinson said. “His first two years he was making turnovers, not reading situations right. He used to be a defensive liability, and now we put him sometimes on the best shooter.

“I’m pleased that he’s played beyond his contract. For a guy who wasn’t even in the league, he became a stalwart, a guy you can count on.”

Casual sports fans may struggle to name a player on the Nets, particularly one who is a regular … well, Joe. The team shot an amusing video spoofing Harris’s accuracy in hopes of earning him a spot in the All-Star 3-point shooting contest.

Harris visited spots around Brooklyn — he tossed oranges into a shopping cart, lofted eggs into a hot frying pan and shot some coins into a tip jar.

“Joey Buckets! He deserves to be in the contest,” Carroll said when asked about his teammate. Throughout games, Harris is serenaded — “Jo-ey Buck-ets” — by the superfans in the Brooklyn Brigade section of Barclays Center. It’s one of many nicknames. Others include Lumber Joe and Beef Jerky Joe.

Beef Jerky Joe? “Like the Sasquatch from the commercial,” Harris said with a laugh.

Though Harris has blended into Brooklyn, in truth he is an accidental hipster. On a walk to the Food Hall at the Industry City development in Sunset Park, he was wearing black because it just happens to be the Nets’ team color. His slightly slouchy knit cap was pulled low to fight the chilly gusts from the Brooklyn waterfront. The lumberjack beard was a remnant of a no-shave off-season.

Every Nets player except Jared Dudley lives in Brooklyn, a throwback to when the Dodgers were Brooklyn’s team and the players raised their children in the borough and car-pooled to Ebbets Field.

Harris walks to Barclays Center on game days. After practices, Atkinson frequently sees him with his backpack, headed to the subway.

“He signed a big contract; you’d think he’d get a car service,” Atkinson said. “But that’s him, and that’s us. We’ve had a little success, but we’re still humble.”

In the Food Hall, there’s everything a local might expect, like Korean comfort food and an all-avocado restaurant. Harris stopped for a cup of … well, you know. Not a nitro, cold brew or pour over, mind you.

“How do you like it?” the barista asked Harris.

“Black,” he said.









Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Daniel Victor

In his two years as president of basketball operations for the Los Angeles Lakers, Magic Johnson presided over a team as chaotic and playoff-free as the one he’d inherited.

The Lakers succeeded in stockpiling talent — including the franchise-altering signing of LeBron James — but failed in putting together complementary pieces, or attracting the second major star Johnson openly said he was chasing.

[Magic Johnson stunned the basketball world by suddenly stepping down on Tuesday.]

Here’s a look back at Johnson’s high and low points while running the team.

In February 2017, four seasons into the team’s longest-ever playoff drought, the Lakers reshuffled their front office by firing the general manager, Mitch Kupchak, and installing Johnson as its president. Less than a month later, Rob Pelinka, a longtime agent, was hired as the general manager, reporting to Johnson.

Officially and unofficially, Johnson had remained tied to the team since he retired in 1996. He owned a share of the team from 1994 to 2010, and after that he was an honorary vice president — a title the team took away from him after he violated the league’s tampering rules by tweeting about free agents.

Three weeks before he was hired in his new role, he had returned to the Lakers as an adviser to Jeanie Buss, the team’s president and co-owner. She would soon clean house while promoting Johnson.

“Everyone associated with the Lakers will now be pulling in the same direction, the direction established by Earvin and myself,” she said, using Johnson’s given name. “We are determined to get back to competing to win N.B.A. championships again.”

The first major test of the new regime had decidedly mixed results.

Days before the draft, Johnson shed the costly contract of Timofey Mozgov by giving up on D’Angelo Russell, whom the team had selected second over all just two years earlier. In return for the duo, the Brooklyn Nets gave up Brook Lopez and the 27th pick in the draft, which turned into the promising Kyle Kuzma. But Russell has blossomed this year with the Nets, earning an All-Star appearance while leading Brooklyn back to the playoffs.

Russell’s departure opened the point guard spot for Lonzo Ball, who has flashed two-way potential but largely fallen short of his lofty expectations as the second pick in the draft. In addition to Kuzma, the Lakers struck gold with Josh Hart, who was selected 30th and has become a core piece.

Johnson made no secret of his intent to draw the game’s biggest stars to Los Angeles, with an eye toward what was expected to be a major 2018 off-season. The team largely punted on the 2017 off-season to preserve its salary cap space in 2018, signing Kentavious Caldwell-Pope to a one-year deal.

At the 2018 trade deadline, the Lakers shed the contracts of Jordan Clarkson and Larry Nance Jr., opening more cap space. Johnson said the trade indicated the Lakers would have the cap space and the ability to land two star players, either by trade or free agency.

“I wouldn’t have made the move if I wasn’t confident,” he said at the time.

Signing LeBron James to a long-term contract in 2018 was exactly the kind of result the Lakers had planned for and needed, setting expectations that they would return to the playoffs and compete for a championship. But the free agents the Lakers signed to surround him — Caldwell-Pope, Rajon Rondo, Lance Stephenson, JaVale McGee and Michael Beasley — immediately puzzled some observers.

An optimist would have called them playoff-tested veterans. Others saw it differently: A cast of nonshooters and big personalities who would have a questionable fit next to James and the Lakers’ young talent.

The hodgepodge crew was assembled partly because the team struck out on its bigger targets. After years of speculation that Paul George would return to his hometown, he instead opted to re-sign with Oklahoma City. The San Antonio Spurs sent Kawhi Leonard east to the Toronto Raptors. DeMarcus Cousins signed a bargain, one-year deal with the Golden State Warriors.

Once the season arrived, the Lakers blew it in dramatic fashion, extending their record playoff drought. But they preserved cap space for the 2019 off-season, giving them another chance to add a star.

There could be little doubt the Lakers would be interested in Anthony Davis as soon as he became available. James and Davis share an agent, and the Lakers were long believed to be Davis’s most committed suitor.

But when the All-Star center made a public trade request in late January, he created a debacle for Johnson and the Lakers. The players in the Lakers’ young core — Ball, Kuzma, Hart and Brandon Ingram, the second overall pick from the 2016 draft — were constantly named in leaked trade offers.

The Pelicans made an effort to head off any potential tampering when they announced Davis’s trade request. “We have also requested the League to strictly enforce the tampering rules associated with this transaction,” the team said in a statement.

In addition to Davis’s connections to the Lakers, Los Angeles had a well-known history of tampering, dating back to Johnson’s tweets before he took over.

Johnson was not very subtle about recruiting George during a 2017 appearance on “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” during which he was asked what he would do if he saw the player socially.

“We’re going to say hi because we know each other, you just can’t say, ‘Hey, I want you to come to the Lakers,’ even though I’ll be wink-winking like, ‘You know what that means, right?’ ”

The episode earned Johnson a warning from the N.B.A., and the team was later fined $500,000 for what the league deemed impermissible contact between Pelinka and George’s agent.

In June 2018, Johnson was fined $50,000 for his comments about Giannis Antetokounmpo after praising the Bucks star.

In February, the Sixers’ Ben Simmons — who plays as an oversize point guard, like Johnson did — requested a meeting with Johnson to get playing tips, prompting Johnson to publicly praise the former Rookie of the Year. But the league ultimately determined Johnson had not broken tampering rules.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

Kyrie Irving scored 37 points and the Boston Celtics rallied late in the fourth quarter to beat the Indiana Pacers by 99-91 on Wednesday night. The win gave Boston a 2-0 lead in their best-of-seven, first-round series

Coming out of a timeout and with a chance to tie, the Pacers’ Wesley Matthews threw an inbounds pass into the bench on the other side of the court with 12.1 seconds left. On the ensuing play, the Celtics’ Al Horford passed to Jayson Tatum, who was fouled on a two-handed dunk. He completed the three-point play to make it 97-91 with 8.8 seconds left.

The Pacers turned it over again and the Celtics were able to close out the game at the free throw line.

Tatum scored 26 points, including a thunderous dunk down the stretch to help punctuate a 10-0 run by Boston over the final five minutes.

[Read: Jayson Tatum has a daily reminder of the booming dunk he delivered on LeBron James last year.]

Bojan Bogdanovic led Indiana with 23 points. Thaddeus Young added 15 points.

Indiana led by 79-68 entering the fourth. Horford opened the final period scoring on a hook shot in the lane and Tyreke Evans responded with a 3-pointer on Indiana’s first possession.

But then Boston caught fire, using a 16-0 run, including eight straight by Irving, to take an 86-82 lead with 5:04 to play. Indiana missed 10 straight shots during the run, finally breaking a nearly eight-minute scoring drought with a 3-pointer by Matthews in front of the Celtics’ bench.

Horford had been a game-time decision with an illness, but was able to remain in the Celtics’ starting lineup. He was noticeably a step slower at the outset and didn’t take his first shot until late in the second quarter. He didn’t score his first points until the fourth, finishing with four points, 10 rebounds and four assists for the game.

Game 3 is Friday in Indiana.

BUCKS 120, PISTONS 99 Giannis Antetokounmpo scored 13 of his 26 points in Milwaukee’s big third quarter and the Bucks beat the Detroit Pistons, 120-99, on Wednesday night to take a 2-0 lead in the first-round playoff series.

Eric Bledsoe led the Bucks with 27 points, and Khris Middleton had 24. Milwaukee is trying win a playoff series for the first time since 2001.

Luke Kennard had 19 points for Detroit. Reggie Jackson and Andre Drummond each added 18, and Drummond had 16 rebounds. Detroit star Blake Griffin sat out again with a left knee injury, but received a technical for the second straight game for arguing from the bench.

After scoring 10 points and playing only 14 minutes in the first half because of foul trouble, Antetokounmpo scored Milwaukee’s first seven points in the third quarter. The Bucks outscored Detroit 35-17 in the period to take a 93-76 lead into the fourth.

Detroit clawed within seven in the fourth before the Bucks put it away, capped by a hard drive by Antetokounmpo on a break. He banked in an awkward reverse-angle shot while crashing to the floor after being fouled by Drummond. He competed the three-point play it make it 105-87.

Game 3 is Saturday night in Detroit.

GRIZZLIES HIRE EXECUTIVES The Memphis Grizzlies have hired Rich Cho as vice president of basketball strategy and Glen Grunwald as a senior adviser within the franchise’s basketball operations department.

Cho is a former Charlotte Hornets and Portland Trail Blazers general manager. Grunwald was general manager of the Knicks and the Toronto Raptors.

Before coming to Portland, Cho was an assistant general manager with the Seattle SuperSonics and continued in that role when the franchise became the Oklahoma City Thunder. Grunwald worked with the Knicks from 2006-13, serving as executive vice president and general manager for the final two seasons of that stretch. He was Toronto’s general manager from 1997 to 2004.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Scott Cacciola

LeBron James, sidelined since Dec. 25 with a groin strain, will remain out until at least next week, the Los Angeles Lakers announced Wednesday. The team said in a statement that James did not travel with the Lakers on their current road trip for games against the Oklahoma City Thunder on Thursday and the Houston Rockets on Saturday.

The Lakers have struggled without James — and without Rajon Rondo, their backup point guard, who was also injured in the Lakers’ road win over the Golden State Warriors on Christmas Day. Entering Thursday, the Lakers had gone 4-7 without those two players and were tied with the Sacramento Kings for eighth place in the Western Conference standings.

[On Pro Basketball: The Warriors Prepare to Add Another Star: DeMarcus Cousins]

After their current trip, the Lakers will return home to play the Warriors on Monday — which, incidentally, is slated to be Game 2 of the Warriors’ well-publicized DeMarcus Cousins experiment as he returns from surgery on his Achilles’ tendon — but it is highly unlikely that James will be available. The Lakers said in their statement that James “has been cleared to return to practice commencing next week, and progress toward a return to game play thereafter.”

James, 34, had been fairly indestructible thus far in his career. He appeared in all 82 regular-season games for the Cleveland Cavaliers last season. But while the Lakers initially listed James as “day to day” after he underwent a magnetic resonance imaging exam last month, the team has been handling him — and his eventual return — with caution.

James was playing some of the best basketball of his career before he got hurt, averaging 27.3 points, 8.3 rebounds and 7.1 assists a game. A four-time N.B.A. most valuable player, he is in the first year of a four-year contract worth $154 million.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

John MacLeod, the coach who led the Phoenix Suns on an improbable run to the 1976 National Basketball Association finals against the Boston Celtics — a series that included one of the most memorable playoff games in N.B.A. history — died on Sunday. He was 81.

MacLeod’s son, Matt, confirmed the death to The Associated Press but did not say where he died. The elder MacLeod had Alzheimer’s disease for more than a decade.

MacLeod joined the Suns in 1973 after they had ended a 38-44 season. At the time the Suns, who joined the league in the 1968-69 season, had never won an N.B.A. playoff series.

His first two seasons in Phoenix were rocky, but in time he became the most successful coach in Suns history, going 579-543 in the regular seasons over 14 years.

MacLeod’s first winning season with the Suns ended with a 42-40 record, just enough to edge them into the 1976 playoffs. Phoenix then went on a dramatic run that culminated in their defeating the top-ranked Golden State Warriors for the Western Conference championship in seven games.

The finals against the Celtics featured a tense fifth game, with the teams tied at two games apiece, that went into triple overtime at Boston Garden and into the basketball history books.

Coming back from far behind, Phoenix tied the game at the end of regulation play and again at the end of the first overtime. Many fans swarmed the court after the Celtics star John Havlicek sunk a shot at the end of the second overtime to put Boston ahead, 111-110. But the referees ruled that a second remained on the clock and cleared the court.

The game, with an unruly capacity crowd in the stands, went into a third overtime because of a canny decision. With that one second remaining, the Suns Hall of Fame guard Paul Westphal called a timeout, even though Phoenix had none left. That cost the Suns a technical foul and gave Boston another point on a successful free throw, but it also gave the Suns the ball at center court for a final play. The Suns forward Gar Heard took the inbounds pass, shot and tied the score, 112-112.

“Credit that move to Paul Westphal,” MacLeod told The New York Times. “He thought of it while we were trying to map out a play. But with all those fans surrounding him, taunting our players and causing more fights, how could a coach coach? It was the most dangerous situation I’ve ever been in.”

In the end, the Celtics triumphed, 128-126, and won the series, four games to two. The Suns, nicknamed the Sunderella Suns for their unlikely run, went on to appear in eight more playoffs and two more Western Conference finals under MacLeod.

He had a franchise-record 37 playoff victories with the Suns and was placed in the Phoenix Suns Ring of Honor in 2012.

The Suns dismissed him in 1987, after the team started the season 22-34. He also coached the Dallas Mavericks from 1987 to 1989, taking them to the playoffs in one season, and the Knicks, in 1990-91, achieving a 32-35 record. He finished his 18-year head coaching career with a 707-657 mark.

John Matthew MacLeod was born on Oct. 3, 1937, in New Albany, Ind. He played basketball at Providence High School in Clarksville, Ind., and at Bellarmine University in Louisville, Ky.

He was a successful head coach at the University of Oklahoma before he joined the Suns. He was later the head coach at the University of Notre Dame from 1991 until 1999. MacLeod’s son Matt played on the team for his last two seasons as coach.

After leaving Notre Dame, MacLeod returned to the Suns as an assistant coach. He was also an assistant with the Denver Nuggets and the Warriors, ending his career in 2006.

In addition to his son, his survivors include his wife, Carol, and a daughter, Kathleen.

The New York Times contributed reporting.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Scott Cacciola

Paul George has a small freshwater pond behind his house in Oklahoma City that he stocks with bass, crappie and bluegill. Whenever he has a couple of hours to spare from his responsibilities as a do-everything forward for the N.B.A.’s Thunder, he heads out back with his fishing rod. He releases what he catches — for now, anyway.

“Waiting for them to get a little bigger,” he said.

George has time. Last summer, on the first night of free agency, he agreed to re-sign with the Thunder on a four-year, $137 million deal. The news emanated from a house party that Russell Westbrook, his superstar teammate, was hosting for George, who did not even entertain meetings with rival teams. He was sticking with the Thunder.

In doing so, George made clear that he was banking on his partnership with Westbrook while offering endorsements of the organization and of Oklahoma City’s leisurely pace. He can fish. He can raise his two young children in a quiet neighborhood. And he can focus on basketball, knowing that his future is with the Thunder.

“You can give your everything to one organization, and you know the direction that you’re going,” George said in a recent interview. “There’s so much that players have to deal with that I don’t think people quite recognize. A lot of them are the same issues that everybody else deals with. But this takes a lot of the burden off my shoulders.”

There is something to be said for (relatively) stress-free living. As several other stars careen toward free agency this summer — and grapple with the accompanying distractions with varying degrees of success — George, 28, has been playing the best basketball of his life.

He is averaging 28.2 points, 8.1 rebounds and 4.2 assists, all career highs, while shooting 44 percent from the field and 39.1 percent from 3-point range. He is at least in the conversation for his first N.B.A. Most Valuable Player Award.

“I think the shift I’ve seen,” Coach Billy Donovan said, “is a guy who’s a lot more comfortable.”

George has been limited recently by shoulder soreness, and Oklahoma City has slipped a bit in the standings. But the Thunder are capable of being a force in the playoffs, and they appear to be a close-knit group. One reason: Oklahoma City is not exactly flush with “extracurriculars,” as George put it, so the players tend to linger at the practice facility. They spend a lot of time together, which has helped build chemistry.

“And if one person has to go do something, there’s always someone else who’s like, ‘I’ll tag along with you,’” George said. “That’s kind of been the culture here.”

George was traded to the Thunder before the start of last season, after he told the Indiana Pacers that he would not sign a contract extension. Most figured that Oklahoma City would be a pit stop for George, who grew up in Palmdale, Calif., about 50 miles north of Los Angeles. More to the point: He had told the Pacers that he wanted to be shipped to the Lakers.

Indiana balked and instead dealt him to Oklahoma City, where George averaged 21.9 points and 5.7 rebounds last season. After Oklahoma City lost in the first round of the playoffs, George was a free agent. He could have gone nearly anywhere, including to the Lakers.

“I had so many phone calls and people asking me what he would do when it was all still up in the air,” Tom Hegre, his former coach at Knight High School, said in a telephone interview. “But I personally felt that he would stay with the Thunder. I just didn’t think he would bail on something before he gave it a legitimate chance.”

Hegre also said he suspected that Oklahoma City itself had something to do with George’s decision. Even now, after six All-Star appearances, George is a small-town guy and a self-described “homebody.”

Back in his high school days, George and his father would occasionally ask Hegre if the team was planning to practice over the weekend. Hegre knew that meant they were thinking about going fishing. They had their favorite spots: Hughes Lake, Lake Elsinore, Lopez Lake, Little Rock Reservoir.

“I always thought that was pretty cool,” Hegre said.

George has never played in a major market. Not in high school (Palmdale). Not in college (Fresno State). And not in the N.B.A., which may not be a coincidence. When he was with the Pacers, George lived in a suburban community with a large lake, where he kept a boat. He fished there, too.

At the same time, his exit from Indiana affected him. It was the first time he felt disliked by the masses, and he was someone who had always tried hard to avoid disappointing or hurting people, said Steve Cleveland, his former coach at Fresno State.

When George told Cleveland that he was entering the N.B.A. draft after two seasons at Fresno State, he was apologetic — and so were his parents, who kept apologizing even after George began to star for the Pacers.

“I had to say, ‘Stop it,’” Cleveland said. “But that’s the type of people they are.”

He added: “I’ve never really asked him this, but I’m sure leaving Indiana was a pretty sensitive deal for him. And I don’t think he wanted to go through all that stress again.”

It is not hard to find big-time players who have come unglued at times because of their impending free agencies. Kevin Durant of the Golden State Warriors boycotted the news media for a couple of weeks. Kyrie Irving of the Boston Celtics has complained about the steep price of celebrity. For his part, George blamed “the press” for being a disruptive force in locker rooms.

“Everything gets blown up,” he said. “Everything is a big deal.”

It is no small feat, then, that George has found a home with the Thunder — and calm waters in Oklahoma City.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

Lou Williams, who has the unusual role of leading the Clippers in scoring while coming off the bench, does not run around the court so much as flutter across it. At 6 feet 1 inch and 175 pounds, he has embraced his identity as a butterfly among a herd of cattle.

But at this stage of his career, Williams wants to feel as light and nimble as possible — so he essentially starves himself on game days. After a big breakfast, he refuses to eat again until well after the game itself, often going nearly 12 hours between meals.

It is one of several habits that Williams, 32, has developed over the years, and one that clearly works for him. It is also the opposite of how most elite athletes prepare for games. But Williams is different: He wants to take the court with an appetite.

“That’s crazy,” Landry Shamet, the first-year Clippers guard, said. “I’d weigh about 115 pounds if I did that.”

The Clippers, as they often have this season, turned to Williams on Monday night for an extraordinary performance — this time against the Golden State Warriors in Game 2 of their first-round playoff series. In the Clippers’ 135-131 win, Williams collected 36 points and 11 assists to help erase a 31-point deficit.

Shamet sealed the biggest comeback in N.B.A. playoff history with a go-ahead 3-pointer with 16.5 seconds left, and the Clippers evened the best-of-seven series at one game apiece.

“I’m one of those guys who can get hot,” said Williams, who shot 13 of 22 from the field, “and I just got lost in the moment.”

The Clippers, who have thrived behind Williams in the wake of a midseason deal that sent Tobias Harris to the Philadelphia 76ers, will need all of him again — all his scoring, all his savvy, all his unusual rituals — when the Warriors come to Los Angeles for Game 3 on Thursday.

Make no mistake, the Clippers have their share of scrappy, no-nonsense guys. Patrick Beverley, who has spent the series covering the Warriors’ Kevin Durant like aluminum foil, would trash talk a telephone pole.

Williams, on the other hand, carries himself with a brand of quiet composure that has a power all its own.

“He goes about his business,” said Sam Cassell, an assistant coach for the Clippers. “He’s not overwhelmingly faster than people. He’s not bigger than people. But he understands what he can do on the basketball court, and he does it well.”

The Warriors’ Klay Thompson recently came across a package of highlight clips from Williams’s days as a star guard at South Gwinnett High School outside of Atlanta. What stood out to Thompson was how little Williams had changed.

“He played the exact same way,” Thompson said in an interview before the start of the series. “It was incredible: same step-back jumper, same hesitations, same floaters.”

Williams has stuck with the same general blueprint while refining his skills — slicker, craftier, jazzier. He has also become more resilient. There was a time, he said, when he thought his career might be finished. In 2013, he tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee while playing for the Atlanta Hawks. In his comeback, he turned to Kenny Atkinson, who was then one of the team’s assistants, to help reassemble his game.

Atkinson, now the head coach of the Nets, imbued Williams with the importance of routine.

“Kenny is one of my all-time favorite people in the world,” Williams said. “I give him a lot of credit for getting me back on my feet when I was down and out.”

By 2015, Williams was the N.B.A.’s sixth man of the year with the Toronto Raptors. But he has never been better, more efficient or more dynamic than he has been in his last two seasons with the Clippers, all at an age — early 30s — when most players see their production begin to erode.

Instead, Williams, who has scored more points off the bench than any other player in league history, has only improved. This season, he averaged 20 points and 5.4 assists in just 26.6 minutes a game. Williams also had the ball in his hands more than ever, with the Clippers running 32.4 percent of their plays through him whenever he was on the court, according to usage-rate statistics compiled by Basketball Reference.

Coming off the bench was never something that he necessarily wanted to do, but Williams has no doubt that the role has helped preserve his career because it has kept his minutes down. He has averaged 24.6 minutes a game over his 14-year career. (LeBron James, by comparison, has averaged 38.6 minutes.)

“It’s given me an opportunity to stretch my career out, and I think I’m in my prime right now, man,” Williams said. “I’m just rolling.”

At the same time, Williams has his quirky customs, which help give him a sense of stability, starting with his game-day breakfast: hash browns, egg whites, French toast and chicken sausage along with a fruit smoothie that he sweetens with honey. He loads up because he knows he won’t eat again for a while.

“I guess my body’s gotten used to it,” Williams said, who will just do the smoothie if the Clippers have an early tipoff.

He also has the peculiar habit of arriving at the arena on the late side, about 90 minutes before the start of the game.

“I don’t like idle time,” he said.

Once there, though, Williams has an active schedule: 15 minutes in the training room getting stretched out, 10 minutes in the weight room doing exercises with a stretch band and a medicine ball, then about 17 minutes on the court making 150 field goals as Cassell feeds him passes.

Before a recent home game ahead of the playoffs, Williams made nearly 80 percent of his attempts, including two skyscraping moonshots from the baseline, which is a shot that he has developed in case a 7-footer lunges at him with his arms extended. Williams says he only practices shots that he will attempt in games, however improbable or acrobatic.

“I catch myself at least two or three times a game just putting my hands up, like, ‘How did that even happen?’” Shamet said.

Williams wraps up his on-court work with 20 free throws and 10 court-width sprints, then retreats to the locker room to put on his ankle braces and check his phone. “Just to make sure there’s no family emergencies or anything like that,” he said.

With 20 minutes on the clock, the Clippers have their team meeting. Before they head to the court, Williams gathers his teammates around him for one final huddle — or rather, they gather around him, as if he has some sort of gravitational pull.

Once the game begins, Williams takes a seat on the bench — which is the only time he stops moving. But he is watching his potential defenders and studying the flow, readying himself for the moment when he sheds his warm-ups late in the first quarter.

If Cassell can pinpoint one flaw, it might be that Williams commits too many turnovers. He is an excellent passer, especially coming off ball screens — Shamet considers him one of the most underrated passers in the league — but he sometimes tries to do too much, Cassell said. So Cassell will remind Williams to do what he does best: Shoot the ball. 

It is what everyone wants to see from Williams, who is regarded around the league as a player whom other players love to watch.

“It means a lot coming from my peers,” Williams said. “I think as competitors, that’s why we get into this, to gain respect from the guys who have played the game, and you walk away and they say, ‘He was a tough cover — that dude was nice.’”

All while being fueled with a hunger of his own creation.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Keeping Score

By Victor Mather

The Knicks won a basketball game Thursday night. That has not happened since Jan. 4.

There won’t be a ticker-tape parade, but it was a surprise. This, after all, has been a really bad season for the Knicks.

They are 11-47. The win, over the Atlanta Hawks, 106-91, broke an 18-game losing streak, which was a franchise record.

The team traded away its most popular player by far, Kristaps Porzingis, and in return got a rookie and a couple of expiring contracts. The deal also meant the cancellation of the coming Latvian Heritage Night at Madison Square Garden, which frankly was shaping up to be one of the highlights of the season.

To be fair, a core of loyalists insist that these Knicks are a fun bunch to watch. And there is optimistic talk for next year.

The Knicks are bad enough to have a decent shot at the top draft pick, probably Zion Williamson, Duke’s superstar big man. Cap space will allow the team to seek big-name free agents, and there is sunny speculation that the team could land stars like Kevin Durant or Kyrie Irving or even both.

We’ll see about that. But for now, fans are left pondering if the Knicks are historically dreadful or just run-of-the-mill dreadful.

Let’s see how the Knicks rate, at least in the current century.

That means this year’s Knicks won’t have to compete against the consensus worst team of them all, the legendary 9-73 Philadelphia 76ers of 1972-73.

Despite a couple of 50-win seasons, in 2000 and 2013, the Knicks’ winning percentage this century is .416, worst in the N.B.A. Yes, even worse than the Washington Wizards, and Charlotte Hornets, and even the Nets.

Here is how the 2018-19 Knicks stack up.

This is where it begins and ends. Wins. Losses. But mostly losses. Lots and lots of losses.

The Knicks are 11-47, giving them a winning percentage that looks like a typo: .190.

But there were worse seasons in the last 20 years. In 2012, the Bobcats (now the Hornets) finished at 7-59 in a lockout season for a .106 percentage.

Over a full season, the 76ers in 2016, in full tanking mode, only barely managed to break double digit wins with a 10-72 record.

The Knicks are only 11th worst.

Even counting just those streaks that are contained in a single season, the Knicks’ 18-gamer comes up short. The 2011 Cleveland Cavaliers and the 2014 76ers both managed to stumble to 26 straight losses. After Thursday’s win, the Knicks have lost their chance at that ignominious record.

The Knicks have been outscored by 8.7 points in an average game this season.

Again, there have been worse teams. The 2012 Charlotte strike team lost by 13.9 points a game. The 2000 Clippers put up minus-11.5 over a full season.

The Knicks are only 25th.

There are those Sixers again: In 2015, they shot .408 for the season. At .430, the Knicks are 39th.

The 2009 Grizzlies had only 17.4 assists per game, trailed closely by the 2006 Knicks of Larry Brown, Stephon Marbury and notorious nonpasser Eddy Curry.

This season’s Knicks aren’t good, but they aren’t really bad, at 19.9, for 91st place.

It is not a good time for defensive stats in the N.B.A. Using the metric points allowed per 100 possessions, three teams this season are in the top five of the century: The Cavaliers are allowing 117 points per 100, worst of the era, and indeed for as far back as Basketball-Reference’s stats go. Over the last 20 years, this season‘s Suns are second, and the Knicks, at 113.4, are seventh.

Do any of this year’s Knicks individually reach truly humiliating marks? Not really.

Frank Ntilikina’s .342 shooting percentage is poor certainly, but it is only 24th worst among players with 15 minutes a game and 40 games played, a lot better than DeShawn Stevenson’s .285 from the 2012 Nets.

So we are forced to conclude, that while dispiritingly bad, the Knicks come up short in another way too. They are not even really close to being the worst team of the last 20 years.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Sports of The Times

By Michael Powell

HOLBROOK, Ariz. — A wind that would not stop tugged at flags and sent sand devils spinning into this desert town as I walked past Mr. Maestas Restaurant and the Arizona Pawnman and the Empty Pockets Saloon and came to a rise and looked across an emptiness of plain that stretched the limits of vision.

I recalled my talk a few days ago with Mike Budenholzer at the Ritz-Carlton in New York City. He coaches the Milwaukee Bucks, who finished the regular season with 60 wins and the best record in the N.B.A. His team features a brilliant Greek forward-guard-center named Giannis Antetokounmpo, Montenegrin and Turkish forwards, a Spanish center, and black and white players from corners rural and urban.

He is known for his deft handling of diverse pro players. Where, I asked, did you pick up that skill?

Let me tell you about my hometown, Holbrook, he said.

Budenholzer, blue-eyed and middle-age, was once was a skinny, blond, teenage shooting guard in this old cattle and railway town. He starred on the Roadrunners basketball team at Holbrook High School alongside his boyhood friend B. J. Little, an African-American; a few Anglos; and a half-dozen Navajo boys who could run and pass all day and all night.

“There’s no doubt in mind that my background there has helped me navigate life in the N.B.A.” Budenholzer said. “Growing up, you knew Navajo culture and black culture from Louisiana and Mexicans. I learned to foster the same sort of culture.”

Holbrook comprises its own world, an isolated high desert city of 5,053 that sits on the southern lip of the Navajo Nation, which is the size of the Republic of Ireland. To the south lies the small Mormon town of Snowflake, and beyond that the forests and canyons of the White Mountain Apache Reservation, which is bigger than Delaware.

Holbrook’s population is roughly 50 percent white and 50 percent Navajo, Hopi, Mexican and black. The city has long kept a dormitory for Navajo children whose parents want them to attend the well-regarded Holbrook High School. Founded in the 1880s, Holbrook was an outlaw-friendly habitat, and a sign on the South Side tends to underline this point: Bucket of Blood Street. Terrill’s Cottage Saloon once stood on this street, and more than a few cowpokes breathed their last there.

Quite a few youngsters leave in search of better prospects. The city is tattered at the edges, a few buildings lie gape-toothed and abandoned, a motel stands vacant, and a single movie theater shows a single movie. But it’s a hospitable place, and the main drag, Navajo Boulevard, has Mexican restaurants and motels and Native American jewelry stores and a herd of giant plastic dinosaurs that signal proximity to Petrified Forest National Park.

Budenholzer’s father, Vince, coached the basketball team and won a state championship in 1971 and was inducted into the state coaching hall of fame. At the time, Mike was an assistant to Gregg Popovich of the San Antonio Spurs. During a team visit to Phoenix, he told Popovich of his father’s ascent. When Vince showed up later that day, Popovich got down on a knee in the hotel and said, “Here is a real coach.”

Father and son were two hoops tramps who traveled in school buses hundreds of miles across the empty quarter of Northern Arizona in search of games and wins.

Vince’s Holbrook teams played a variation on the Native American hoops style known as Rez Ball: A quicksilver, sneaker-squeaking, run-pass-pass-shoot style, perfect for the Navajo and the Apache, for whom distance running is a millenniums-old tradition.

“We pressed from the minute we stepped off the bus,” Vince said. ”I had one Navajo who was taller than 6 foot, and so what?”

Vince is 89 and still lean in that way of an old athlete, and he and his wife, Libby, moved nine years ago to Queen Valley, in the cactus foothills of the Superstition Mountains, east of Phoenix. They miss Holbrook; it remains the home of their hearts, but the winters on that mile-high plateau ran them off. “The winds never stop blowing,” Libby said.

The couple raised seven children, five boys and two girls, in a small house across Florida Street from Hunt Park. Libby became a councilwoman and served a term as mayor, and Vince moonlighted as Holbrook’s parks and recreation director during the summer. He built a hoop in his backyard and put up a floodlight so the teenagers could play into the evening.

Little, Mike’s old teammate who is now a judge in nearby Winslow, drove me by that house, which was sold years back. The hoop still stood.

“Oh man, we’d play there the whole night, and Vince would never stop coaching,” Little said. “My grandparents said I had to get home before the streetlights came on. But if I was playing ball with Mikey at the Budenholzers, that was my pass.”

Father and son Budenholzer flashed hauntingly similar smiles when they recalled those days. Mike was the leading scorer on the Roadrunners, a kid who could shoot from near and far and almost as well with his left hand as his right. Little, whose grandparents came from Louisiana to work in the McNary Saw Mill, ripped rebounds, and the Navajo kids dribbled and ran and pressed.

The day before the tournament, two of the best players got drunk. They were suspended, and that left the Roadrunners with one star: Mike Budenholzer. That was not enough horsepower, and the team lost. “It boggled my mind that they would get caught,” Mike said.

“I think I would give up an N.B.A. championship to get that one back,” he said.

I looked at him: You’re kidding, right? He shrugged. “I mean, winning a state championship in Arizona, that’s a big deal.”

Navajo and Mexican and Anglo kids still play baseball, basketball and football and live more or less shoulder to shoulder. “It was a town where you played everything and with everyone else,” Mike said. “The only social rule you recognized in high school was that Mormon girls don’t date non-Mormons.”

He shrugged. “So you adjust.”

Budenholzer was a good student and got into Pomona College, a fine liberal arts institution in California. He was not yet sold. He was a jock and he wanted to play basketball and he already had a scholarship offer in hand.

He visited Pomona and sat around with other students and listened as they talked of their choices. There was the kid who was weighing Williams College or Pomona, and another who was wait-listed at Stanford University. They looked at Budenholzer and asked, What about you?

“I tell them I’m trying to choose between Pomona and Yavapai Community College, where I could get a free ride,” Budenholzer said. “And they were, like, ‘whaaaat?’ And I’m thinking, ‘What am I doing here, I’m in the wrong place.’ ”

His brothers and sisters decided Mikey, the youngest, was going to Pomona. They pooled money as best they could so he could afford it. He graduated with a degree in philosophy and economics.

Before he left Holbrook and set out on his life journey, Budenholzer did what he did every summer, which is to say he rounded up B. J. Little and other buddies and piled into a car and headed north to play in the informal spring tournaments that are a staple of life on the Navajo reservation. They drove across washes and around canyons and past red-ribbed buttes that reared like primeval monsters. They pulled into Navajo towns: Dilkon and Window Rock, Tuba City and Ganado, anywhere there was a tournament.

They got caught up in endless Rez Ball games, running and shooting and banging one another from morning till late at night. As hoops is civic religion on the rez, crowds of hundreds watched and cheered, not least for the bilagaanas (Navajo for whites).

“Those spring tournaments got rough, the referees were terrible and man, it was just the best,” Budenholzer said.

During the season when reservation teams arrived to play Holbrook, a long line of cars would follow. The rule was straightforward for Holbrook’s fans, Vince said. Make it to the gym by 4 p.m. for a 7 p.m. game, or you could forget about finding a seat.

It is not so different when Mike’s teams pull into Phoenix. After working as an assistant with the Spurs, he coached the Atlanta Hawks before coming to Milwaukee. Whenever his team plays the Phoenix Suns, Little’s sister sets to work organizing a Holbrook caravan. Dozens of cars wend their way down through ponderosa forests and jagged mountains to the game — whites, Mexicans, blacks and Navajos, sometimes 100 strong. After the game, Budenholzer talks with them.

“It always moves me,” Mike says.

It’s been a long time since he left home. This summer, after the N.B.A. playoffs and before the pro summer leagues begin, he and Vince and Libby plan to drive up through the Tonto National Forest and across the Salt River Canyon to Holbrook. And when they reach their old high school gym, they will find teammates and students and teachers and townspeople gathered to listen as Superintendent Robert Koerperich dedicates the Vince Budenholzer gym floor.

“To let our kids know that you can come out of Holbrook and coach a pro team, how amazing is that?” Koeperich says.

Mike Budenholzer looks forward to walking Navajo Boulevard and maybe seeing the family house again. Then he wants to stand behind Vince and Libby and clap so hard.

“To have raised seven kids on a teacher’s salary in a great small town and let us interact and form great friendships with Navajos and Mexicans and blacks and Mormons. They were really ahead of their time,” Budenholzer said. “This is America.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

CHARLOTTE, N.C. — Stephen Curry was about 25 minutes into a news conference here on Saturday afternoon when a magician who goes by the name Jibrizy sidled up to the dais to do a card trick. Curry, the Golden State Warriors point guard, seemed impressed.

“That was nice, big fella,” Curry said. “That was crazy. Y’all see that? Did y’all see that? What’s your name, boss? Jibrizy? Nice to meet you, man. Fire. You’re fire. That’s what’s up.”

Lots of weird stuff tends to happen during N.B.A. All-Star weekend, and a cameo by Jibrizy was no exception. But it was also the rare instance when the spotlight left Curry, if only for a moment, in the run-up to the weekend’s flagship game on Sunday.

Curry, a six-time All-Star and two-time most valuable player who has already coaxed Golden State to three championships, is used to lots of attention. But he relished his return to Charlotte, where he grew up to become perhaps the greatest shooter of all time — and where he is still revered.

“From the time I started playing basketball at 5, right down the street at the recreation center, to now, a lot has happened,” Curry said. “A lot of great things.”

Curry was not so great Sunday, but that was not the point. He finished with 17 points, 9 rebounds and 7 assists for Team Giannis in a 178-164 loss to Team LeBron in the All-Star Game, which was a defense-free postscript to a weekend that was a Curry family affair.

“Incredibly fond of the family,” Commissioner Adam Silver told reporters. “They seem to be the first family of Charlotte, at least this week.”

For much of his trip home, Curry was accompanied by his father, Dell, who spent 10 seasons playing for the Charlotte Hornets, and his mother, Sonya, who drilled a half-court heave after the family helped refurbish a community center. It was probably the family’s splashiest shot of the weekend.

“I was surprised,” Stephen Curry said, “because the first four she flung underhand, they didn’t make it to the rim. And then that last one, it just looked good from the moment it left her hand, and I was going, ‘Wham, bam, can of ham! That’s going in!’ ”

Curry had less success in Saturday night’s 3-point shootout, where he was joined by his younger brother, Seth, who plays for the Portland Trail Blazers. Stephen Curry made it to the championship round before losing to Joe Harris of the Brooklyn Nets.

But Curry had also found time to return to Davidson College, his alma mater, where he clambered into the student section to celebrate an 80-72 victory over St. Joseph’s on Friday night.

“The energy in the building was unbelievable,” Curry said. “It’s surreal every time I get to go back there.”

The following afternoon, Curry swayed in a sea of reporters (and at least one magician) as he fielded a wide-ranging mix of questions.

What did it mean to him to be back in Charlotte? “It’s kind of overwhelming to be honest,” he said. “I’ve got to be like the Energizer bunny.”

Could he say something nice to all his fans in the Dominican Republic? “I’ve been there, and I hope to go back,” he said.

Did he have a favorite basketball-themed movie? “Probably ‘Love & Basketball,’ ” he said. “I’m a romantic, bro.”

During warm-ups for Sunday’s game, Curry mimicked a game of volleyball with Philadelphia 76ers center Joel Embiid, posted up a ball boy so that he could take an entry pass from Oklahoma City Thunder point guard Russell Westbrook, made chitchat with bigwigs who were courtside and jacked his share of 30-footers. Most of them went in. All-Star weekend is a circus, but it is still basketball, after all, and Curry has unique skills.

He is assembling another spectacular season, even if his work has been overshadowed by fellow All-Stars like James Harden of the Houston Rockets, Paul George of the Thunder and Milwaukee’s Giannis Antetokounmpo. Curry has been so consistently good for so long now — and his team so dominant — that perhaps some of the novelty has worn off. It is unfair, of course.

If his feats feel too familiar, consider his production this season: 28.6 points, 5.2 assists and 5.1 rebounds per game while shooting 48.8 percent from the field and 44.4 percent from 3-point range. He missed 11 games with a groin injury but spent part of that time gluing the Warriors’ locker room back together after Kevin Durant and Draymond Green had a big dust-up.

The friction stemmed from Durant’s looming free agency, which has been a steady hum of distraction for the Warriors. But Curry has been a stabilizing force for his team — and even for the league.

With a contract that runs through the 2021-22 season, Curry has not had to face pressing questions about his future. He is committed to the Warriors, and the Warriors appear committed to him. He is a throwback in an era dominated by player movement, the current face of which is Anthony Davis, the All-Star center who recently requested a trade from the New Orleans Pelicans. So many other stars face uncertain summers, too: Durant, Kyrie Irving and Kawhi Leonard among them.

But Curry has his niche in Northern California, even if his roots are in North Carolina. After Sunday’s game, he described trying to persuade his father to move to the Bay Area, where Curry has settled in with his wife, Ayesha, and their three children.

Dell Curry, who is a color commentator for the Hornets, always says no.

“This is where home is for him,” Stephen Curry said.

And for Stephen Curry, the whereabouts of his father seem to be the only player movements on his mind. Curry said he was unconcerned with free agency this summer and the potential departures of his teammates.

“That’s a part of the business,” Curry said. “But the great teams, the great players, they stay in the moment and they understand what’s in front of them.”

And so, after taking a weekend to dip into his past, Curry returned to looking ahead. The journey goes on.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Jason Bailey

Steven Soderbergh’s electrifying new film “High Flying Bird,” which debuted Friday on Netflix, tells the story of a fictional N.B.A. lockout set in the Instagram Age, in which longstanding concerns about money, race and social justice are galvanized by disputes over players’ personal images, and who has the right to control them. (Appropriately, the entire film was shot on an iPhone.)

The film’s dense but fast-moving script, written by the playwright Tarell Alvin McCraney (“Moonlight”), is also replete with references to the game’s history — not least to the currents of protest and politics that have coursed through pro basketball since it was segregated. There’s a rich subtext here, much of it only hinted at. Below is a spoiler-filled guide.

As in baseball, football and most areas of American life, segregation kept black players out of the white pro basketball leagues, confined to amateur and semipro all-black teams, which formed in schools, churches, community centers and the like. Games were frequently paired with ragtime dances to make for a full evening of entertainment.

The best known of these barnstorming teams, often called “Black Fives” by historians, were the New York Renaissance and the Harlem Globetrotters. The Renaissance — or, as they were better known, the Rens — were so impressive that in 1947, Coach Joe Lapchick of the New York Knicks lobbied the Basketball Association of America to admit the team into the young league, a precursor of the National Basketball Association. The owners voted him down. The next year, a competing league, the National Basketball League, brought the team in instead.

[Read the Times review of “High Flying Bird” by A.O. Scott.]

Indirectly. The Rens and the Globetrotters, in particular, were internationally known for their dazzling play, often besting white teams when matched up for exhibition games. The Rens, for example, beat the all-white Oshkosh All-Stars in the first integrated tournament championship in 1939; the Globetrotters beat the Minnesota Lakers in a celebrated 1948 exhibition game that The Chicago Tribune pinpointed as key to the integration of the game.

As Spencer (Bill Duke) explains in “High Flying Bird”: “There’s a reason why the N.B.A. started integrating as the Harlem Globetrotters exhibitions started going international. Control. They wanted the control of a game that we played, and we played better.”

Lapchick, however, did not give up. In 1950, the year after the Basketball Association of America absorbed the smaller National Basketball League and became the N.B.A., he signed Nat (Sweetwater) Clifton, who had played for the Rens and the Globetrotters (as well as in baseball’s Negro leagues), to join the Knicks. That same season, West Virginia State’s Earl Lloyd joined the Washington Capitals and Chuck Cooper was drafted out of Duquesne by the Boston Celtics. (Another black player, Hank DeZonie, played five games with the Tri-Cities Blackhawks in December of that season.)

Talking to The Times in 2008, Lloyd told stories of being heckled and spat upon by fans, although the abuse he encountered was “no comparison,” he said, to what Jackie Robinson withstood three years earlier in professional baseball.

Yes — in fact, there were four. (One lasted only a few hours.) In the first dialogue scene of “High Flying Bird,” the sports agent Ray Burke (André Holland) tells a client, “Last time this happened, folks was broke left and right!” That “last time” was the 2011 lockout, which lasted  five months and resulted in the loss of 16 regular-season games, the entire preseason and an estimated $400 million in revenue for team owners and players.

A 10-year deal was announced late that November, which heavily favored owners. It reduced player salaries by nearly $300 million and shifted an estimated $3 billion to the owners over the course of the contract. The truncated 66-game season finally got underway on Christmas Day.

Much screen time in “High Flying Bird” is spent contemplating the legality of public appearances and exhibition games by league-signed players during the lockout. The 2011 lockout was threaded with similar concerns. The film’s fictional team owners grouse over the attention attracted by a “lockout street ball event in Las Vegas,” presumably inspired by the “lockout league” in Vegas, which comprised two weeks of pickup games with more than 70 N.B.A. players in September 2011, according to The Las Vegas Sun. (Profits from ticket sales were donated to charity).

Dozens of players filled the pay gap by picking up spots on teams in Europe and Japan. As The Times’s Howard Beck noted at the time, however, “a vast majority of them are rookies, middling veterans and fringe players.”

As New York magazine and others have noted, the character Myra (Sonja Sohn) strongly resembles Michele Roberts, who became the executive director of the National Basketball Players Association in 2014. The first woman in history to head a major sports union, Roberts made waves from the beginning. A Times profile a few months into her tenure noted that she had already “forcefully questioned the league’s pay model and labeled its entire cadre of owners as replaceable.”

Like the character she inspired, Roberts is a tough-as-nails negotiator who is undaunted by working in a male-dominated world. “My past,” she told players while making her case for the job, “is littered with the bones of men who were foolish enough to think I was someone they could sleep on.”

In the film’s first scene, Ray gives a client a mysterious package, calling it “the Bible.” It contains the book “The Revolt of the Black Athlete” by the sports sociologist and civil rights advocate Dr. Harry Edwards, who also appears briefly in Ray’s office near the end of the film. Edwards first came to national prominence for organizing the Olympic Project for Human Rights, whose members Tommie Smith and John Carlos made headlines for raising their gloved fists while receiving medals at the 1968 Olympics.

Edwards has spent the ensuing years teaching, writing, consulting and leading protests. “Revolt,” published in 1969, argued that racism is as prevalent in sports as in any other section of society. “The sports world is not a rose flourishing in the middle of a wasteland,” he writes. “It is part and parcel of that wasteland, reeking of the same racism that corrupts other areas of our society.”

“High Flying Bird” is bookended by recordings of two folk-rock classics, both performed by Richie Havens as part of his opening set at Woodstock. The title track, Havens’s recording of a folk song written by Billy Edd Wheeler, was praised by the musicologist Richie Unterberger for its “arresting minor-keyed melody and brooding lyrics, contrasting the freedom of a bird to the singer’s earthbound misery.” It isn’t hard to connect those lyrics to Ray’s notion that his clients should free themselves from the earthbound constraints of the sports industry and bring the game back to its roots.

“Handsome Johnny,” which Havens wrote with the Oscar-winning actor Louis Gossett Jr., closes the film, telling the story of a young man who marches off to a series of wars. Given the movie’s themes, the song’s refrain is appropriate: “It’s a long hard road, hey, before we’ll be free.”







Advertisement

On Pro Basketball

A move West came with dire warnings, but the reality is setting in that a James-led team might miss the playoffs.

The last time LeBron James’s team missed the playoffs was 2004-5, his second year in the N.B.A.CreditCreditMark J. Rebilas/USA Today Sports, via Reuters

Supported by

By Marc Stein

LeBron James can’t say that he wasn’t warned. 

Lots of us were crowing in the summer, and pretty loudly so, about what would greet the unquestioned Lord of the Eastern Conference if he dared to defect. 

Sign with the Los Angeles Lakers if you wish, for the sunnier Hollywood life and all the perks, but brace yourself for the most trying regular season of your career if you decide to go West. 

That was the gist of the scouting report — which in retrospect could not have been much more prescient. 

On cue: The most daunting and, yes, disappointing season of James’s career is right here, right now, for the biggest name in basketball.

And it appears he will soon have to stomach that it’s going on his ledger in the most permanent ink that he was unable to bring a halt to the longest postseason drought in Lakers history — barring an unforeseen resurrection from a fractured group that sits four and a half games out of a Western Conference playoff berth with 19 games to go.

No matter how much culpability you wish to assign James for what is poised to go down as the Lakers’ franchise-record sixth successive trip to the draft lottery, he’s going to have to own this as much as the front-office tandem of Magic Johnson and Rob Pelinka as well as the under-fire coach Luke Walton.

The LeBron Way, for years and years, has worked something like this: He inevitably gets most of the credit when his team flourishes; his teammates absorb the bulk of the blame when things unravel. But this is different. This would be the jarring sight of James, fresh off his eighth consecutive finals appearance, actually missing out on the N.B.A. postseason for the first time since his second professional season in 2004-5, when he was just 20.

Even though he can rightly point to his recent groin strain as the biggest standings-altering disruption these Lakers have endured, James surely understands that his maiden campaign in Los Angeles is bound to be recorded in many precincts as a failure to make the playoffs that belongs to him.

The Lakers are 4-7 since James returned from the groin injury that sidelined him longer (17 consecutive games) than any previous injury in his 16-year career. They have followed up an unsightly road loss to Atlanta in their final game before the All-Star break with harder-to-rationalize road losses to New Orleans, Memphis and Phoenix since the break.

After Saturday night’s humiliation against a 13-51 Suns team, which dropped the Lakers to 30-33, James’s gang only sports a 1.3-percent chance of reaching the postseason, according to Basketball-Reference.com.

They also have the league’s eighth-toughest remaining schedule, according to Tankathon.com. 

We’ll never know if the Lakers, who had risen to a heady fourth in the West at 20-14 when James sustained the groin injury in a Christmas Day rout of Golden State, could have kept building upon that promising start with a healthy LeBron. But we most certainly do know that James’s mere return to the lineup, at 34, wasn’t enough to rescue a roster that has been assailed since conception for its lack of perimeter shooting and its defensive deficiencies. Nor has he been able to galvanize a locker room that was deeply destabilized by the Lakers’ trade pursuit of the New Orleans superstar Anthony Davis, which became all-consuming in late January, and has never recovered. 

It obviously doesn’t help that James, after missing two key free throws in the final minute Saturday, is also converting a substandard 66.9 percent of his attempts from the line to give his critics more handy fodder.

Leaving his home-state Cleveland Cavaliers for the Lakers last July without the accompaniment of a second superstar meant that James, in a far deeper conference, would have little margin for error just to reach the playoffs. When you combine James’s injury absence with the continuing post-Davis malaise and the team’s declining ball movement since Lonzo Ball (ankle) was sidelined six weeks ago, it adds up rather quickly to a margin that is long gone.

The calls for Walton’s dismissal, as they were in January, remain nonsensical. A coaching change now, much like New Orleans’s decision to fire General Manager Dell Demps shortly after the trade deadline, would have no discernible effect on the Lakers’ short-term prospects beyond providing their frustrated fans with a “See? We did something” sacrifice.

The prevailing assumption in league coaching circles remains that Walton will almost certainly be dismissed after the season, followed by the Lakers resuming their trade quest for Davis. But denying Walton an opportunity to at finish out a season wrought with drama and distraction since James’s first dribble in purple and gold would be cruel and needless. 

Changes are coming, though. It’s an open secret that a big off-season reset looms in Lakerland. James always knew that his new club would not be in the title mix until his second campaign as a Laker, but his patience predictably faded quickly — one more reason desperation has become so palpable around this team. 

Many of us know-it-alls in the news media indeed wrote in our preseason forecasts that the playoffs were no certainty for these Lakers, as constructed, but very few of us were actually willing to outright predict that they would miss out. Reason being: It’s not very smart to bet against LeBron Raymone James.

Yet we’ve suddenly reached that unprecedented juncture where it would be wholly irresponsible to advise you that James can extricate himself from this jam just because he’s LeBron. Whether it’s the lingering effects from his groin injury, or his own unmistakably waning spirit in the face of increasingly bleak odds, James has been lacking the zip you associate with his well-chronicled playoff mode — which he assured us on Feb. 21 had been “activated” earlier than usual.

I briefly stood beside James on the floor in Charlotte, N.C., before the All-Star Game tipped off and bought into the idea a surge was coming when he insisted he was eager to embrace “the challenge” of hauling the Lakers out of their hole.

“And I’m getting healthy, too,” James said that night. 

A mere two weeks later, it’s already time to start imagining the N.B.A.’s first spring without King James after watching him for eight straight Junes — and wondering how on Earth he’s going to cope with not being a part of it.

Marc Stein is a sports reporter specializing in N.B.A. coverage, with occasional forays into soccer and tennis. He spent nearly 15 years at ESPN before coming to The Times.  @TheSteinLine • Facebook 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Victor Mather

The Knicks will not be going to the N.B.A. playoffs.

If this doesn’t feel like hot-off-the-presses news, it shouldn’t. You may have checked the standings earlier in the season and seen that the Knicks were 4-10, or 8-20, or 10-40.

With Monday night’s 115-108 loss to the Kings in Sacramento, the Knicks fell to a record of 13-51, the worst in the league. Yes, even worse than the Bulls, the Cavaliers and (shudder) the Suns. The loss also officially eliminated them from a playoff race they were unofficially eliminated from months ago.

The loss, to a team that will probably also miss the playoffs, was hardly mitigated by a good scoring effort by the rookie shooting guard Allonzo Trier, who had 29 points.

The Knicks are last in the league in shooting percentage and last in assists. So, in short, they can’t pass and they can’t shoot. Basketball Reference reports that they are particularly bad at the easiest type of shot, shooting only .603 from three feet or closer and .348 from three to 10 feet, both worst in the league.

The rookie center Mitchell Robinson is fifth in the league in blocks and third in blocks per game. That’s good. But no other Knick is in the top five in anything. That’s not good.

When you don’t have a lot of wins, you wind up with some losing streaks. It’s just math. The Knicks came into the new year with an eight-game, a six-game and a couple of five-game skids, as one might expect. More unexpected: In January and February, the Knicks lost 18 in a row.

On the plus side, the Knicks have put together two winning streaks. One was two games and the other was three.

The Knicks have now missed the playoffs for six straight years, just short of the franchise record. From 1960 to 1966, the Knicks missed the playoffs seven straight times. But those Knicks teams always won at least 21 games in that span. This season, the Knicks are on a pace to win 16 or 17 games, giving them a chance to break the franchise-worst record of 17 in the abysmal 2014-15 season.

Knicks fans, desperate for a light at the end of the 82-game tunnel, are already focusing on the coming draft lottery, right Spike Lee? Zion Williamson, Duke’s dominant center, is the big prize. Adding Williamson and a couple of free agents lured by the bright lights of New York may finally bring the postseason back to Madison Square Garden.

Unfortunately for the Knicks, the rules have been changed some this year, and having the very worst record does not offer any advantage. The three worst teams, one of whom is virtually certain to be the Knicks, all will have an identical 14 percent chance of landing the top pick. If the Knicks really are tanking to get a lower lottery spot, they can probably stop now.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Billy Witz

GREENSBORO, N.C. — As advanced statistical analysis and its attendant new technology continue to reshape how sports are understood, watched and even played — when to punt on fourth down in football, where to position a baseball team’s infielders and how to build a winning basketball team — these new numbers also create a vexing problem:

How to account for what complex algorithms cannot explain.

The thirst for information is such that one essential set of college basketball data that will help determine the field for this month’s N.C.A.A. tournament, Ken Pomeroy’s eponymous KenPom ratings, includes a metric to shed light on when things do not actually go by the numbers.

Pomeroy has a rather analog term for it: luck.

“Luck is basically performance in close games,” Pomeroy said. “People generally don’t like the term ‘luck’ — that’s the feedback I get. Technically, I’d call it ‘randomness’ or something a lot more wordy, but that doesn’t fit well above a column.”

In short, KenPom’s luck factor considers the difference between a team’s record and what the data would expect it to be. If a team’s record is better than its predictive numbers, it is lucky. If it is worse, then it is unlucky.

This season, according to the KenPom ratings, no team among the 353 Division I college men’s basketball programs has been luckier than the University of North Carolina at Greensboro.

The Spartans resemble a team one might expect from a coach, Wes Miller, who transferred to North Carolina as a walk-on, then earned a letter on a national championship team and eventually a spot in the starting lineup. They are resourceful and determined, and have the ethos (and the recruiting budget) of an underdog.

Greensboro has a 28-6 record — the best in program history — and finished second in the Southern Conference, behind Wofford, which was ranked 20th in this week’s Associated Press poll.

Did luck have something to do with it?

Miller, pulling up a folding chair before a recent practice, reacted as one might expect. He praised Pomeroy as “a genius,” expressed fascination with analytics and said there were others on his staff who delve deeper into the data to provide the most salient information about the Spartans and their opponents.

Then he assumed a defensive stance.

“I’m not a mathematician,” he said. “I’m a basketball coach who’s always trying to figure out an edge to help me coach better. But there’s never been anybody that could put a number on will and togetherness of group.

“There’s something that’s happening in our games that’s indescribable to his data that’s getting us over the hump,” Miller added. “That’s toughness. That’s the ability to win close games. The proudest I ever am as a coach is when we have an awful shooting game or we have an awful offensive game and things don’t go our way and we still find a way because our team was able to dig down and figure out a way to get over the hump.”

Francis Alonso, a senior guard from Malaga, Spain, who is the heartbeat of his team, put it another way: “There’s this saying — it’s champions’ luck.”

Alan Castel, a psychology professor at U.C.L.A. who studies memory and metacognition — how we think about our thinking — said that while confidence (or the lack of it) is a fundamental element of athletic competition, it is often misplaced.

“The human mind doesn’t rely on big data,” said Castel, whose research has debunked the hot-hand theory — the belief that a team should get the ball to a shooter who is on a hot streak. “We’re prone to rely on illusions and small sample sizes and what we want to think.”

If Greensboro’s Spartans are the luckiest team in the country, he said, they deserve some of the credit for it.

“To be lucky, you need to put yourself in a situation,” Castel said. “To win the lottery, you need to buy a ticket.”

Or, he added, to win the N.C.A.A. tournament, you need to get in. And to do that, the Spartans almost certainly will require a little more luck.

Some years ago, a résumé like the Spartans’ might have looked glossier. They have a sparkling record, are 7-0 in games decided by 5 points or fewer and have been competitive in defeats at 10th-ranked Louisiana State (97-91) and sixth-ranked Kentucky (78-61), a game that they led with less than nine minutes left. But they lost to Wofford twice in the regular season — by 29 and 30 points — and for a third time on Monday night, 70-58, in the Southern Conference tournament championship game.

Yet it is this profile — a team that has squeaked past bad teams, competed against good ones and been pounded only twice, by the best team in its conference — that explains why Greensboro’s luck factor is +.175, which, if it holds until the season is over, would be the highest of any team since 2013.

What that figure means, Pomeroy said, is that in a luck-free environment, the Spartans’ winning percentage would be 0.175 lower than it is. As a result, they would have six fewer victories — and a 22-12 record — without any luck.

There are real-world consequences: Through Tuesday’s games, Greensboro ranked 81st in KenPom’s overall ratings, lagging behind East Tennessee State (71st) and Furman (55th), against whom they combined to win four of five games this season. (The N.C.A.A.’s new NET metric, which the tournament selection committee is using to evaluate teams this year, is only slightly kinder: It has the Spartans 58th.)

Once the N.C.A.A. tournament begins next week, with a broad spectrum of schools from around the country, a clearer picture will emerge of whether teams that have been deemed to have enjoyed metric good fortune have punched above their weight all season.

The Spartans, at this point, would consider themselves lucky to have the chance.





Advertisement

The tales of Zion Williamson’s feats did not begin when he arrived at Duke. They probably won’t end there, either.

CreditCreditIllustration by Sam Manchester/The New York Times; Photograph by Associated Press

Supported by

By The New York Times

Zion Williamson’s legend grows with every game these days, with each new thundering dunk and every stunning new feat of elevation. It has been this way for several years now, with Williamson the featured actor in a growing collection of viral clips that show a player with the skills to outrun almost anyone, to catch almost anything, to challenge almost anybody. Even his lowest moments — the sneaker that couldn’t hold him, the injured knee that cost him five games — have somehow morphed into highlights. But Williamson, an 18-year-old Duke freshman, has been making memorable moments for years. A group of New York Times reporters tracked down some of the people who were present for a few of them, to ask them about the memories that stand out the most.

By Kevin Armstrong

Forgive Tom Konchalski.

The publisher of High School Basketball Illustrated first observed Zion Williamson in person at the Elite 24, an all-star showcase for the nation’s top prep prospects, on Aug. 20, 2016. The court at Pier 2 in Brooklyn Bridge Park was the stage, and Williamson was 10 for 10 from the field, scored 23 points and shared most valuable player honors. Konchalski was impressed.

To Konchalski’s well-trained eye — in five decades he had amassed an inventory of reports that stretched from Michael Jordan to LeBron James — Williamson, who had just turned 16, appeared to be an interior technician, a player at ease turning on his defender to make it to the rim for understated finishes. Because of Williamson’s body type, Konchalski considered him a left-handed Jamal Mashburn, a reference to the beefy Bronx product who played 11 seasons in the N.B.A.

When Konchalski sat down at his typewriter after the Elite 24 to describe Williamson’s effort, he wrote that the “6-foot-5 junior Zion Williamson, the master of quiet domination, provided a bit of fresh air.”

Looking back, Konchalski says now, he got it all wrong.

“I’m wiping off copious amounts of egg from my face,” he said. Williamson, he knows, “is anything but quiet.” 

By Adam Zagoria

The first time LeBron James showed up to watch Zion Williamson, they wouldn’t let him in the door.

It was July 2017, and James, once a transcendent teenage talent himself, went to see Williamson, the next big thing, at a showcase in Las Vegas. Williamson’s team, South Carolina Supreme, was playing Big Baller Brand, which featured LaMelo Ball, a brother of Lakers guard Lonzo Ball. It was, by summer youth basketball standards, a must-see event.

James, of course, wasn’t the only one interested in that confluence of basketball stardust. The N.B.A. players Damian Lillard, Andrew Wiggins, Jamal Murray and Thon Maker were in the gym by the time James arrived, adding buzz to a crowd of more than 4,000 that threatened to swamp a court configured to hold less than half that many.

Even in warm-ups, the excitement was palpable. The fans oohed and aahed as Williamson tossed balls high in the air and dunked them; many spectators held cellphones, the better to share video clips of a scene that was quickly called the “craziest A.A.U. game ever.” 

But James never saw any of it. With fans standing a dozen deep, nearly spilling onto the court from every direction, he and his group were told that just letting him into the gym constituted a security risk. A teenager’s mere presence, it seemed, had squeezed out basketball’s biggest star. James was told he couldn’t come in.

“We shut him down,” an Adidas marketing executive told CBS Sports at the time. “The corners were 500 deep. That’s where it got insane.” 

It would be a year and a half before James got to see Williamson play in person. In February, he took a 35-minute flight from Philadelphia to Charlottesville, Va., and watched from courtside as Williamson, playing for Duke, went for 18 points, 5 rebounds and 5 assists in a win against Virginia. Williamson’s athleticism, James declared, was “ridiculous.” 

By David Waldstein

Bishop Richardson was averaging about three alley-oop assists to Williamson every game when their team, Spartanburg (S.C.) Day School, arrived at Ben Lippen School in Columbia, S.C., for a game during Williamson’s junior year. 

Williamson dunked a lot back then, and he had recorded at least two slams in the first half that had the gym rocking. “I remember it vividly,” Williamson said last week. “Their student section was really into the game, talking a lot.”

The real highlight, though, was still to come. With Spartanburg ahead by 39 points, Richardson, a spindly guard who had played varsity since the eighth grade, found himself jogging easily up the right sideline when he spotted Williamson closing menacingly down the other side of the court. He tried another lob; he knew the pass didn’t have to be perfect.

“If you threw it anywhere near the rim,” Richardson said, “he was going to get it.” 

On this occasion, Richardson’s toss arrived well below the rim. But that enabled Williamson to do something outrageous: He rose into the air, reached out with two hands to grab the incoming pass at about shoulder height, and — still rising, now high enough to peer inside the rim he was about to shake — used one sweeping, circular motion to bring the ball down to his waist and then back up to the left side of his body before ramming it through the basket with his left hand.

The crowd erupted. 

“I remember thinking, ‘Holy cow, I’ve never seen anyone do anything like that, let alone be a part of it,’” Richardson said. “People were falling out of the bleachers.”

The dunk made it onto highlight reels and national sports shows within hours, but Richardson did not see a replay until the next day, when he and teammates sneaked a peek in a study hall.

“I wish I could take credit for it,” Richardson said, “but it was completely accidental.” 

By Marc Tracy

Vertical leap is measured using a simple contraption: a tall pole with a series of long, metal fingers that project horizontally from it on top of one another — narrow wings stacked up, up, up, at consistent increments. It may seem lo-fi, but it is also foolproof: Your vertical reach while jumping is the highest metal flange you are able to bat away from its set position. Subtract standing vertical reach from that number, and you have a player’s vertical leap. 

When Duke put its players through the test one day last summer, Zion Williamson’s vertical leap was measured at 46 inches. But to the teammates and Duke staff members who were present, mere numbers do not do the moment justice.

“We were all in shock,” the sophomore guard Alex O’Connell said. 

Williamson, who went last, was off the charts. On his first attempt, he casually swatted aside the highest measurement. A staff member adjusted the pole to its highest setting and reset the tabs, and Williamson repeated the feat. They put weights under the contraption to lift it a few more inches into the air. Williamson batted the highest measurements aside again. 

“It was something you don't see a lot, especially with a guy who is built like him flying through the air,” forward Javin DeLaurier said. “It's a sight to behold.”

Nolan Smith, an assistant coach who played for four years at Duke and several more in the N.B.A. and Europe, said he had never seen anything like it. Cam Reddish, another Blue Devils’ freshman, said he missed out; he said he was in another part of the building when Williamson tested the test itself. 

“I just heard that he broke the record,” Reddish said. “Zion things.”

By Kevin Draper

In the beginning, the former Duke standout Jay Williams kept track of the Williamson hype the same way everybody else did: through low-quality video clips shot in high school gyms and then posted on the internet. Williamson’s high-flying plays quickly became “the eighth wonder of the world,” Williams said.

Then he saw him in person. 

“I have never seen a player casually do a 360 in a game,” Williams said of seeing Williamson do precisely that in a game against Clemson this season. “Even when you saw Vince do it in college,” he said, referring to Vince Carter, who played at the University of North Carolina, “there was a level of oomph that he needed to exert that type of energy. My man casually did it in the game. He did a 360 like I would do a layup.”

Williams said plays like that one were the reason comparing Williamson to other basketball players is a mistake. 

“To me, I was looking at a football player who had the finesse of basketball ability,” he said. “I’ve never seen that before. I played against Julius Peppers in college. I remember him being the only guy Carlos Boozer was somewhat intimidated to go against because he couldn’t just move him around. I remember thinking for the first time: ‘Oh, I was looking at Julius Peppers but through a basketball lens. What? What?’ Julius was agile, but I am talking about the frame of the body. It reminded me of a linebacker or a tight end. Just different.” 

By Joe Drape and Marc Tracy

Spike Lee was in his seat and Barack Obama was settled in his, down past the end of the Duke bench. But in front of North Carolina’s Luke Maye — in the space where Zion Williamson had stood a moment earlier — there was suddenly … nothing. 

“I didn’t hear anything, man,” Maye said Thursday. 

What everyone quickly realized was that the story had quickly changed from a heated rivalry game — top-ranked Duke vs. No. 8 North Carolina — into something far more bizarre: Williamson’s Nike sneaker had broken apart as he made a move at the free-throw line. He was down. North Carolina was racing upcourt. And everyone else was asking: What just happened? 

Maye, in that moment, had the best seat in the house. 

“I just took the ball,” he said, “and just started going.”

Initially, the Blue Devils were just as confused. The first thing Duke’s Javin DeLaurier saw from his spot on the bench was the sneaker on Williamson’s left foot, or what was left of it, anyway: Its sole was flapping free, like a banner in the wind.

To DeLaurier, this counted as good news.

“I was like, ‘Oh, no, it’s just his shoe,’” he said. “There was a sigh of relief.”

He had, after all, seen this before. He had blown out a shoe before. He had seen Williamson do it, too. “Zion’s a big human being, moving pretty fast, changing direction,” DeLaurier said. “It happens.”

By David Waldstein

“I consider it my fault,” De’Andre Hunter says now.

He’s not wrong. Late in a February game at Virginia, Cavaliers guard Kyle Guy whipped the ball crosscourt to his teammate De’Andre Hunter, who waited at the 3-point line, deep in the corner, and without a Duke player within 15 feet of him. Williamson was on the left side of the court, playing his usual feisty, active defense, so Hunter, in the right corner, took his time uncoiling the 3-point attempt.

Williamson, though, had closed the gap by then. Soaring across the court with five quick steps, he took off from about six feet away just as Hunter unloaded. “I consider it my fault,” Hunter said. “I took way too long setting it up and releasing the shot. But he came a long way.” 

In fact, Williamson jumped so high and stretched so vertically that his right hand was well above the height of the 10-foot rim when he cleanly swatted Hunter’s shot into the stands. 

“He just came out of nowhere,” Hunter said. 

Worse news, at least for Hunter, was that the clip made its way to ESPN’s “SportsCenter” and other highlight shows, and it is now a staple of the Williamson YouTube filmography. 

“I didn’t know it was going to be such a big deal,” Hunter said recently.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

LOS ANGELES — Steve Kerr, the coach of the Golden State Warriors, was asked about the concept of inevitability before his team faced the Los Angeles Clippers on Thursday night, which is something that happens during the N.B.A. playoffs. Some questions are more philosophical than others.

In this case, the question had to do with the perception shared by many that the Warriors are invincible, that another championship is theirs to lose: What is it like for Kerr to live inside that bubble, knowing full well that his players are capable of making mistakes and even (gasp) failing?

Kerr took the opportunity to recall a moment from his childhood in Southern California. When he was 9 years old, he watched his beloved U.C.L.A. Bruins defeat the Kentucky Wildcats for another N.C.A.A. championship, their 10th in 12 years. Coach John Wooden retired after the game. In the nearly half-century since, U.C.L.A. has won one championship — in 1995, when Bob Myers, now the general manager of the Warriors, was a reserve forward.

Kerr made sure to note that coincidence. But his larger point was about how sports are unpredictable, which is one of the reasons they are so appealing. Just as no one knew, for example, that the Warriors would make the wrong kind of history by blowing a 31-point lead on Monday, no one knew that they would bounce back on Thursday by obliterating the Clippers, 132-105, in Game 3 of their first-round series.

At the same time, no one knows whether the Warriors will go on to win a third straight championship — or how long this team will remain intact. Nothing is inevitable. Everything is uncertain. All dynasties end.

“So you don’t worry about expectations,” Kerr said. “Just go out there and play and do your best and see if you can sustain it for a long time. But everything comes to an end, and we’re just trying to keep this going for as long as we can.”

The central (if unmentioned) figure in all of this, of course, is Kevin Durant, who has taken on all comers this season in the form of a 7-foot, long-limbed question mark. Bound for free agency this summer, Durant could stay with the Warriors, with whom he has already won two championships — but most expect him to go. Who knows? The agita has sometimes clouded his team’s season.

The only sure thing is his basketball genius, which still belongs to the Warriors — for now if not forever — and was on display Thursday night against the Clippers, as he helped lift Golden State to a two-games-to-one lead in the series. Game 4 is Sunday at Staples Center.

“Honestly,” Clippers Coach Doc Rivers said, “they dissected us.”

It was a resounding statement by the Warriors in the wake of Monday’s fiasco, and no player was more electric or dynamic than Durant, who made all five of his shots in the first quarter — and somehow seemed to improve as the night went on. He finished with 38 points and 7 assists, shooting 14 of 23 from the field.

“He came out super aggressive, in kill mode,” the Warriors’ Draymond Green said. “That was all the difference for us.”

Durant’s explosion in Game 3 followed a couple of muted efforts for him early in the series. Defended by the Clippers’ Patrick Beverley, a 6-foot-1 guard whom Durant has described in recent days as both a “pit bull” and a “pest,” Durant managed 23 points before he was ejected in Game 1, then struggled even more in Game 2: 21 points and 9 turnovers while shooting just 5 of 8 from the field.

At practice this week, Durant had a scrum with the news media that felt more like a doctoral defense. He explained his approach on offense. He talked about strategy and chemistry and shot selection and rhythm. He may have mentioned the officiating once or twice. He also offered a reminder in case anyone had forgotten.

“I’m Kevin Durant,” he said. “You know who I am.”

After Thursday’s game, Durant said the only difference was that the team had run more plays for him while putting him in better positions to score, often on the low block. Consider: He scored 27 points in the first half but did not make a single 3-pointer. His mentality, he said, never changes. He was not going to force bad shots. He was not going to turn his matchup with Beverley into some sort of me-first duel.

“I don’t do that type of stuff,” Durant said. “I just play.”

The Warriors have had one bad stretch against the Clippers in this series, and it cost them. But they clearly seem more together and more resilient than they were back in November, when they visited Staples Center and lost to the Clippers in overtime after Green and Durant barked at each other on the bench, then feuded in the locker room. The team wound up suspending Green for a game. Durant, annoyed at questions about free agency, later boycotted the news media for about two weeks. The cracks were showing. Was the dynasty crumbling?

The last few days, then, were in some ways a microcosm of their season: The Warriors reassembled the pieces. They recognize how fragile this all is, how rare their opportunity. And if they needed a reminder, they got one in Game 2 when DeMarcus Cousins, their starting center, tore a quadriceps muscle. He will likely miss the rest of the postseason. In his absence, the rest of them will go on — with an understanding that this run will not last forever.

“We realize how lucky we are to do this,” said Klay Thompson, their All-Star shooting guard. “Leave it out there. Nothing’s ever guaranteed in the future, so play to win now and do it collectively.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Sopan Deb

There is a good chance that LeBron James might not be playing basketball in June of 2020, barring a big free agent signing or a trade. But someone will be onstage discussing him.

“King James,” a play by Rajiv Joseph, will be making its world premiere at the Steppenwolf Theater in Chicago in May 2020, the Steppenwolf announced on Thursday as part of its 2019- 2020 lineup announcement, a diverse slate with a particular emphasis on people of color. Anna D. Shapiro will direct.

The show will depict life in Cleveland after 2016, when the Cavaliers won the championship, as two friends “spar in a verbal game of one-on-one, revealing past secrets, present truths, and a possible future after ‘The King’ has left the building.” (Last summer, Mr. James left Cleveland for the Los Angeles Lakers.) The play will also be produced on the West Coast in Los Angeles, where Mr. James currently resides, as part of the Center Theatre Group’s 2020- 2021 season.

Other highlights from Steppenwolf’s upcoming season include the debut of “Lindiwe,” a musical featuring works by the famed South African group Ladysmith Black Mambazo (Nov. 7-Dec. 29, 2019). Tracy Letts, a Tony Award and Pulitzer Prize winner, will bring his play “Bug” to Chicago, which is slated to be directed by David Cromer (“The Band’s Visit”) and star Carrie Coon (“Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?”, HBO’s “The Leftovers”) and Namir Smallwood (Jan. 23-March 8, 2020).

Lauren Yee’s “The Great Leap,” which last year was at the Atlantic Theater Company’s Stage II in New York, will make a leap of its own to Chicago. Another play about basketball, the work tracks an American team’s trek to Beijing in the late-1980s (Sept. 5-Oct. 20, 2019).

“The Brothers Size,” an early work of Tarell Alvin McCraney, is headlining Steppenwolf’s young adult programming (Oct. 2–19, 2019), as is the world premiere of “I Am Not Your Perfect Mexican Daughter,” an adaptation of the book by Erika L. Sánchez, which will be directed by Sandra Marquez (Feb. 26-March 21, 2020).







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Sopan Deb

BOSTON — Jayson Tatum boomed on LeBron James in last year’s N.B.A. playoffs. You may remember it. Tatum, the 21-year-old swingman for the Boston Celtics, certainly does.

The dunk drew a “wow” from the play-by-play broadcaster Mike Breen. A reporter wrote on Twitter that in the locker room afterward, he overheard James saying that Tatum had “boomed” him, before James repeated four times, “He’s so good.”

“I’ve got a big-ass picture of it in my house,” Tatum said in a post-practice interview on Tuesday.

The dunk came in the fourth quarter of Game 7 of last year’s Eastern Conference finals. Starting from outside the 3-point line, Tatum took two dribbles with his left hand to get to the rim before hammering a right-handed dunk past James, who attempted a block as a helpless defender. Tatum followed the booming with a chest bump of James, one of his boyhood idols, as if to say, “I’m here.”

The Celtics lost that game, but the dunk solidified Tatum, who played one season at Duke, as an emerging N.B.A. star.

After the Celtics’ disappointing regular-season run this season, Tatum’s star hasn’t been as bright so far in these playoffs as Boston faces the Indiana Pacers in the first round. He did not make the leap many had thought he would: While he improved as a rebounder and passer, his shot selection led to more long 2-pointers, causing his true shooting percentage to dip from .586 in his rookie campaign to .547 this year, placing him below .560, the league average.

He increased his frequency of midrange jumpers but decreased his accuracy in making them: 37 percent, down from 44 percent. Many of his advanced metric statistics, including win shares per 48 minutes, value over replacement player and box plus/minus, were worse this year.

Tatum finds himself in an unusual spot, compared with fellow N.B.A. sophomores like Utah’s Donovan Mitchell and Philadelphia’s Ben Simmons. The better Tatum plays, especially in this postseason, the more likely he is to be linked to trade rumors, particularly those involving Anthony Davis, the New Orleans Pelicans star who has requested a trade that could shift the competitive balance in the N.B.A.

Several college starters in this year’s Final Four were older than Tatum. But if he cannot live up to the hype he created in last year’s playoffs — that is, if he becomes just another guard — the Pelicans may be more likely to accept a package from the Los Angeles Lakers or another team besides Boston. At the same time, if Celtics point guard Kyrie Irving opts for free agency this summer, the future of the franchise may rest on Tatum’s shoulders. At barely 21, he’d be the alpha.

Tatum’s future is more uncertain than many other players who have received significant early acclaim. But one way or another, the Celtics need Tatum to be great. Not just for this year’s playoffs, but for the future.

In short, they need him to boom.

In a conversation at the Celtics’ practice facility about his future and the atypical stakes, Tatum had talking points at the ready, ones that he had delivered multiple times before. He stared straight ahead, not making eye contact, as if he were running through the script in his head.

“Trade rumors don’t bother me,” he said in his deep monotone. “They’re talking about trading me for guys like Anthony Davis. So, I mean, I must be doing something pretty well.” When pressed on whether this bothered him, he didn’t budge: “I love the game of basketball. Being traded is part of the game. I’ll play for whomever. It’s something I can’t control.”

He didn’t have much more to say than that. But that is Tatum’s personality, Brad Stevens, the Celtics’ head coach, said. No distractions. That, Stevens said, is his best quality.

“Circumstances don’t affect him,” Stevens said. “First game of the season, he’s unaffected by the jitters that everybody has. Seventh game of a playoff series? Unaffected. At least, he shows himself to be unaffected, and he can thrive in that environment.”

Stevens said Tatum’s quality of play had improved as he got deeper into the season. He became a better passer, averaging 2.8 assists after the All-Star break, compared with 1.9 before. But his shooting dipped, from 38 percent from deep before the break to 35 percent afterward.

Last season, Tatum benefited from the low expectations for the Celtics after injuries to Irving, forward Gordon Hayward and the reserve center Daniel Theis. But he also helped carry Boston to within one win of an unlikely N.B.A. finals appearance. This year, “unlikely” is not in the playoff vocabulary. The Celtics are supposed to get there. And Boston’s fans, never the most positive bunch, can turn on a player in a second. If the Celtics do not advance, after many analysts predicted they would, fans may view Tatum’s season in a harsh light, given how much of the franchise’s fortunes are tied up with him.

Tatum said he was not as nervous about the playoffs this time around. Taking a daily pregame nap with his 16-month-old son has helped. The early returns have been positive: In the first game of the series against the Pacers, Tatum scored 15 points on 11 shots. He was plus-11 in 34 minutes as the Celtics ran away with a win. In Game 2, Tatum was even better. He scored 26 points on 20 shots, including multiple thunderous dunks in the fourth quarter, helping Boston take a 2-0 lead in the series.

But there hasn’t been a highlight that has matched the dunk on James. Tatum shook his head no when asked if he had ever talked to James about that play. A hint of a grin betrayed his practiced demeanor.

“They won, so they got the last laugh,” Tatum said.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

ATLANTA — Kyle Kuzma had his first interaction with LeBron James a little more than a year ago, when Kuzma was a first-year forward with the Los Angeles Lakers and James was a few months from dragging the Cleveland Cavaliers to another appearance in the N.B.A. finals. Kuzma had reached out by phone, hoping for some tips.

“Just wanted to see how one of the greats takes care of his body and has so much longevity,” Kuzma recalled this week in an interview. “Everybody wants to play basketball for as long as possible.”

So much has changed since that initial conversation. Kuzma and James are teammates now, and Kuzma is experiencing the unique challenges that come with playing alongside one of the game’s behemoths. At the same time, James’s body finally betrayed him this season, which has only heightened the sense of urgency within the organization: The Lakers, who have missed the playoffs for five years running, are not in position for a patient rebuild.

James, at 34, may still be in his prime, but the stakes are already high for a franchise that desperately wants to maximize his time in Los Angeles. And while neither James nor Lakers management has shown much enthusiasm for coaxing along a young core — the Lakers tried to ship half the roster to New Orleans last week — they are stuck in this together. James was supposed to be the savior of a flagship franchise gone astray; salvaging the final months of this year would be a key indicator that he still wields that type of power.

“We have to approach the rest of the season just like you would during the playoffs,” Kuzma said.

As Kuzma recalled his talk with James, he had no way of knowing that the Lakers were mere hours from suffering one final implosion before the N.B.A. All-Star break — a 117-113 loss to the Atlanta Hawks that left the team with a losing record and ample opportunity for soul searching.

“It’s time for us to get away and reflect a little bit about where we are as a group,” Coach Luke Walton said. “I think this first part of the season, we’ve gone through a lot of adversity. And we’re probably not where we want to be, but we’re still close enough.”

Close enough, that is, for vying for a spot in the playoffs, which was both an indication of the team’s modest goals and its sad reality. At 28-29, the Lakers are in 10th place in the Western Conference standings. It is unfamiliar territory for James, who has not been on a losing team this late in a season since he was a first-year forward with the Cavaliers.

“But with LeBron on your team, anything is possible,” said Mychal Thompson, a power forward for the Showtime-era Lakers and an analyst for the team’s radio broadcasts. “I mean, look at some of the teams he’s taken to the finals — including last season. He’s capable of doing great things if you just get on board and run with him.”

The Lakers, though, seem fragile after nearly five months of drama — all of it stemming directly or indirectly from the $154 million deal that James signed to join the team last summer. The pressure was on from the start, and little has gone according to plan.

“There’s been more noise this year,” Walton said, “but that was to be expected with the moves in the off-season. That was something to be anticipated.”

Where to begin? Brandon Ingram and Rajon Rondo were suspended for trying to brawl with the Houston Rockets two games into the season. Magic Johnson, the team’s outspoken president of basketball operations, chastised Walton in a closed-door meeting for the team’s slow start, igniting lasting questions about Walton’s job security. Nearly every player on the roster has been injured, and that includes James, who missed 17 games with a strained groin.

And lest we forget: Last week, Johnson and General Manager Rob Pelinka tried to trade away nearly half the roster to the New Orleans Pelicans for Anthony Davis, who, before the start of the season, hired the same agent who represents James. It was the clearest sign yet that Johnson is willing to attempt the very boldest moves — no matter the residual damage.

Consider that the Lakers, amid their ultimately fruitless effort to pry Davis away from the Pelicans, lost by 42 points to the Indiana Pacers. And with rumors of which Lakers would be traded swirling through social media, it was difficult to find arguments in their defense — even from James himself.

Kuzma, who was offered up as one of the pieces in a potential deal, said it had been difficult to drown out the noise.

“It’s definitely tough,” he said, “because this generation, you’re always on your phone, always on social media, always seeing it somewhere on TV.”

But the trade deadline passed, and the roster more or less remained intact. There had been a sense that a surprising win against the Boston Celtics on Feb. 7 would galvanize the team in the wake of so much uncertainty. And even after losing to the Philadelphia 76ers three days later, the Lakers still had a chance to build some momentum against the Hawks on Tuesday.

Before the game, James appeared to be in an upbeat mood. In the locker room, he knelt on a giant inflatable ball as he worked on some core-strengthening exercises. He crooned the lyrics to “Plug Walk” by the hip-hop artist Rich the Kid. He made small talk with Ingram. It was all vintage James.

About three hours later, once the Lakers had punctuated their loss with a turnover, James made a beeline off the court and into the tunnel. He was practically steaming. He had finished with his fifth triple-double of the season — 28 points, 16 assists, 11 rebounds — but the Lakers’ defense was as porous as a coffee filter, and the result was just as messy.

“I can throw that game in the trash,” James said.

In a three-minute postgame session with reporters, Kuzma mentioned the concept of “fun” five times — specifically, the notion that the Lakers were not having much of it.

“A lot of times we’re out there with sad faces, very focused faces,” Kuzma said. “But I think we’re at our best when we’re having fun.”

Fun may not be the primary objective for James, and the psychic effects of the loss are sure to linger until at least Feb. 21, when their season will resume after the All-Star break with a home game against the Houston Rockets. For now, though, the best thing for these players may be to be away from each other for a while, which was one of Walton’s suggestions before they parted for the break.

“Spend some time by yourself,” he said, and added: “I think we’ve got a group that will be ready by the time we get back.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

LOS ANGELES — To celebrate their first home win in 25 days, the Lakers on Sunday dropped streamers that had been collecting dust from the ceiling at Staples Center. The final lineup of the night included Alex Caruso, a 25-year-old guard who spent most of the season in the N.B.A.’s developmental G League.

Caruso knows things were not supposed to be this way. His mere presence — in a crunchtime situation, no less — was a vivid sign that the season had gone sideways for the Lakers, who will be watching the playoffs from various vacation destinations.

Caruso also knows that the Lakers are playing fairly meaningless games, including Sunday’s 111-106 victory over the Sacramento Kings. The Lakers (32-41) have nine more of these to go, starting Tuesday against the Washington Wizards. The buzz of LeBron James’s first season as a Laker is gone. The roster will be overhauled again this summer as the franchise, which has not been to the playoffs since 2013, rummages for solutions.

“But for me,” Caruso said, “these games are really meaningful.”

The Lakers are searching for motivation wherever they can find it, especially as they head toward an off-season of uncertainty. Coach Luke Walton’s job status is tenuous at best, and 10 players on the current roster do not have guaranteed deals for next season. Some of them, like Caruso, are trying to showcase their skills in hopes of acquiring N.B.A. work next season.

“I think this little stretch has been really good,” Caruso said, “because it’s finally allowed me to put all that work I’ve put in over the last two years and show how much I’ve evolved as a player. That I’m gaining confidence and making strides to get better and better.” In 16 appearances for the Lakers this season, Caruso has shot 44.6 percent from the field, averaging 6 points and 2.2 rebounds.

Even players who figure to be a part of the franchise’s future are focusing on personal growth. A team is always a collection of individuals, but the Lakers’ late-season emphasis on “me” is particularly understandable.

“I need to use these games to develop myself and play with the ball more,” the second-year forward Kyle Kuzma said recently.

The Lakers were not yet mathematically eliminated from playoff contention when they lost to the Knicks at Madison Square Garden on March 17 — that would happen five days later — but Kuzma stood by his locker in a red leather jumpsuit after the game and spoke about the immediate future.

“I’m just trying to use these last 13, 14 games — whatever we have — to just try to develop good habits,” he said. “Season’s pretty much over, so that’s the only thing I can really do. Everyone knows I’m a good scorer and I can do that. I’m just trying to complete my game.”

Then there are the injured players who have largely disappeared from view: Lonzo Ball, Brandon Ingram, Josh Hart. For them, the end of this season is about rehabbing for the next one.

After all the losses, injuries and general dysfunction, Walton continues to preach the importance of team play. Same as ever.

“It starts with our effort and how we play and how we compete,” he said. “And our guys have been doing a nice job of that, even though we haven’t been winning games. Whatever lineups we’ve been putting out there, they’re giving what they have. So that’s the No. 1 thing.”

As for James, these are his first truly inconsequential games since his rookie season with the Cleveland Cavaliers, who finished well out of playoff contention. But even then, he could use the end of the season as an opportunity to hone his abilities and gain experience for future endeavors — such as eight consecutive trips to the N.B.A. Finals.

So it is a credit to James, even as the grease fire of his first season with the Lakers smolders, that he is out there — trying. Against the Kings, he finished with his 81st career triple-double: 29 points, 11 assists, 11 rebounds. How does he sustain the motivation?

“If he’s out there on the court, he’s going to give what he has,” Walton said. “That’s probably a better question for him, but I’m getting to know him, and that’s the type of person he is: He respects and loves the game. So if he’s going to play, he’s going to give what he has.”

James said he appreciated the fans who continued to show up. He also said he owed it to himself to play with genuine effort.

“I’ve always respected the basketball gods,” James said, “and if I’m on the floor, I got to try to play as hard as I can or do something to affect the game and not cheat the game.”

Still, times have changed for the Lakers, who have not been to the playoffs since 2013. Before that, they routinely fixated on the Western Conference standings and the number of wins they would need to make the playoffs. Now, the most important number in their universe is 3 percent — as in, their odds of winning the N.B.A. draft lottery.

Then again, the Lakers are not the only team that has so little at stake at this stage of the season. Look no further than the Kings, whose push for a playoff berth has deteriorated in recent weeks. Before Sunday’s game, Coach Dave Joerger held a brief news conference. No one had much to ask.

“I can give you some more stuff,” he said. “I mean, it’s sunny out. It’s spring. It smells like March Madness, Lent and the N.B.A. playoffs. Get the seedings, get it done. Exciting times.”

He paused again.

“Nothing else?” he asked.

Nothing else.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Tracy

The N.C.A.A. said on Saturday that it was appealing a Federal District Court’s decision this month that barring athletes from being paid beyond a scholarship and related costs violated antitrust law.

“We believe, and the Supreme Court has recognized, that N.C.A.A. member schools and conferences are best positioned to strengthen and revise their rules to better support student-athletes, rather than forcing these issues into continuous litigation,” Donald Remy, the N.C.A.A.’s chief legal officer, said in a statement.

Remy said the decision to appeal, by the N.C.A.A. and the major college conferences named as defendants in the suit, was unanimous.

The ruling this month by Judge Claudia Wilken in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California was actually far more favorable to the N.C.A.A. than the plaintiffs, a class of Division I men’s and women’s basketball players and football players, had hoped.

The suit, known as Alston after a lead plaintiff, argued that the N.C.A.A.’s rules barring payments to players — the center of what the association terms the collegiate model, and what is broadly known as amateurism — was illegal collusion. It asked the court to declare as much, and to eliminate all such rules, leaving it up to individual conferences to set caps independently if they so chose.

Instead, while Judge Wilken agreed that the rules were illegal, she found that an alternative, in which the N.C.A.A. continued to restrict payments unless they were tied to education, was acceptable. Under her ruling, colleges could give athletes items like computers, but the N.C.A.A. could continue to bar them from receiving cash in express exchange for their athletic contributions.

Judge Wilken cited a 2015 ruling from the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in a similar case, in which a three-judge panel partially insisted that payment to athletes be “tethered to education.” The same appellate court — albeit probably three different judges — would hear this appeal.

While the N.C.A.A. largely welcomed Judge Wilken’s finding when it was handed down, it said on Saturday that it sought more: to get the courts out of regulating college athletics as much as possible.

“While the district court upheld the distinction between full-time students who play college sports and professional athletes, it erred by giving itself authority to micromanage decisions about education-related support,” Remy said.

Jeffrey Kessler, a lead lawyer for the plaintiffs, said of the appeal in a text message on Saturday morning: “We are not surprised. It was a major defeat for the N.C.A.A.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

The rapper was not pleased that the Minnesota Timberwolves mocked his performance in Milwaukee. He put a curse on the team.

By Benjamin Hoffman

Sports curses come in all shapes and sizes. They can involve livestock, soup commercials, magazine covers and, frequently, the selling of star players.

In recent years, the rapper Lil B has made a name for himself in the sports realm with his curses — most notably on James Harden of the Houston Rockets — but it appears he has some new competition: the rapper Ja Rule.

It all started on Saturday, when Ja Rule was performing at halftime of a game between the Minnesota Timberwolves and the host Milwaukee Bucks.

The performance came on the 17th anniversary of Ja Rule’s collaboration with Ashanti, “Always Be On Time,” hitting No. 1 on Billboard’s Hot 100. But the show came under criticism immediately because of a somewhat misleading video of the crowd reaction and another one showing an unexpected guest: Giannis Antetokounmpo, the Bucks’ star forward, who came out to begin warming up for the second half while Ja Rule was still performing on the court along with a group of dancers.

The rapper initially shrugged off the criticism, but his tone changed when the Timberwolves decided to mock the performance on social media. In a post to Twitter, the team said “We too were hustled, scammed, bamboozled, hood winked, lead astray!!!” The post was a reference to an earlier post by Ja Rule about his role in the ill-fated Fyre Festival, a luxury music event in the Bahamas that failed spectacularly in 2017. 

The rapper was not amused.

The potential effects of this particular curse are unclear, though. The Timberwolves have existed as a franchise for 30 seasons and not only have not won a championship, but they have only made it out of the first round of the playoffs once — in 2004. They are 28-31, putting them just outside legitimate playoff contention, and the notion that Karl-Anthony Towns is departing anytime soon — as Ja Rule suggested with “AND KAT IS LEAVING!!!” — seems unlikely, as he has signed a five-year contract extension that kicks in next year and guarantees him nearly $160 million.

Of course, logic does not have to play a role in sports curses. The Chicago Cubs endured the so-called Curse of the Billy Goat for more than 70 years after the team asked the owner of the Billy Goat Tavern, William Sianis, to leave a game because his goat was bothering fans. That the team had not won a World Series in more than 30 years before the episode was treated as mostly irrelevant. 

Other popular curses have included one in which the athletes endorsing Campbell’s Chunky Soup seemed to become injured at an extraordinary rate. Another claimed that athletes had their performance fall off after appearing on the cover of Sports Illustrated.

The most famous, of course, is the Curse of the Bambino, which doomed the Boston Red Sox to lose after selling Babe Ruth to the Yankees in December 1919. The jinx is credited by some with keeping the Red Sox from winning a World Series for 86 years, despite the first year of that stretch coming before the team sold Ruth, and the fact that the curse was barely mentioned in popular culture before George Vecsey wrote a column about it for The New York Times in 1986. Dan Shaughnessy of the Boston Globe also wrote a book in 1990 that popularized the phrase.

At the very least, the talk of Ja Rule’s curse was good news for Lil B, who spent part of the weekend trending on Twitter. He celebrated by retweeting various people saying Ja Rule was simply stealing a tactic that Lil B had already perfected.

Benjamin Hoffman is a senior staff editor and regular contributor to the Keeping Score column in sports. He joined The Times in 2005.  @BenHoffmanNYT • Facebook 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Kelly Whiteside

The Philadelphia 76er who made the greatest impact in Game 3 of the team’s first-round playoff series against the Nets wasn’t Ben Simmons, the N.B.A.’s reigning rookie of the year, who scored 31 points. Nor was it the team’s most dominant player, Joel Embiid, who missed the game with knee tendinitis. Or the sharpshooter J.J. Redick. Or the four-time All Star Jimmy Butler.

It was Tobias Harris, the oft-traded, oft-underappreciated power forward who has an ego compact enough to fit inside his white headband — with room to spare.

“Tobias was our bell-ringer tonight,” 76ers Coach Brett Brown said Thursday after the 131-115 win gave Philadelphia a two-games-to-one lead in the best-of-seven series, which resumes Saturday in Brooklyn.

Harris finished with playoff career highs of 29 points and 16 rebounds and made all six of his 3-pointers. At 6-foot-9, he owned the perimeter against the Nets’ smaller guards, and his work on defense was just as effective.

“You start looking at Tobias’s rebounds and what he did from the 3-point line,” Brown said. “I’m proud of him. He’s good people, and he was fantastic tonight.”

The Nets are the feel-good story of the postseason, given the expectations for them last fall. But after losses in the last two games, it would seem that chemistry, scrappiness and heart go only so far against a Philadelphia lineup with the most talent outside Golden State.

Harris, who is from Dix Hills on Long Island, was the final piece of a Sixers team assembled to make a deep playoff run. In early February, amid the best season of his career, Harris was traded from the Los Angeles Clippers. He could have signed an $80 million contract extension with the Clippers in the last off-season but decided to gamble on himself instead. He elected to play out his final year and become an unrestricted free agent this summer in hopes of a max contract — and some stability.

Having been traded five times in eight seasons, Harris would like to be able to drop off his dry cleaning, then wake up in the same city to pick it up. At 26, after an All-Star-caliber season, he is looking for a home. That might even be Philadelphia.

He averaged 20 points and 7.9 rebounds this season in a total of 82 games with the Clippers and Sixers. In 27 regular-season games for Philadelphia, Harris averaged 18.2 points, tying him with Butler for second on the 76ers’ scoring list, behind Embiid, who averaged 27.5.

For Game 4, the 76ers may still be without Embiid, which means that they will again need balanced scoring from the rest of their talented cast. On Thursday, Philadelphia had three scorers with 26 or more points (Simmons, Harris, Redick). The last time the franchise accomplished that in a playoff game was Game 3 of the 1978 conference semifinals against the Knicks. That night, it was Julius Erving, George McGinnis and World B. Free.

“I felt good,” Harris said. “I just came in knowing with Joel down, it was a big scoring loss we had out there. I had to be aggressive from the start. I got some good looks throughout the game. I was able to let it fly, and it felt good for it to go in.”

“It was a big game personally for myself and for the team, too,” he added.

Beyond basketball, Harris co-stars in the best buddy movie in the N.B.A., known as the Bobi + Tobi Show. In 2016, Harris and Boban Marjanovic, a 7-foot-3 Serbian center, developed a close bond while playing for the Detroit Pistons. They were then traded to the Clippers for Blake Griffin in January 2018. About a year later, they became a package deal headed to Philadelphia.

The Clippers produced three web episodes of the “Bobi + Tobi Show” focused on the pair’s friendship and foibles. They took a SoulCycle class together. They attempted a dance lesson. The fun continued in Philadelphia, where a TV station did a quiz show segment with them, focusing on trivia about their new city. Neither could pronounce “Schuylkill.”

In Game 3, Marjanovic played the sidekick during Harris’s star turn. He came off the bench and split time with Greg Monroe, who had replaced Embiid in the starting lineup.

Monroe and Marjanovic combined for 43 minutes and 21 of the Sixers’ 54 rebounds. With Harris defending on the perimeter, the load was lighter on the big men in the paint, though Marjanovic fouled out with about seven minutes left in the game.

No matter. His buddy had his back. The game was in control, and Harris looked right at home.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Victor Mather

It was a humble TV listing, informing readers that the Knicks would be playing the Washington Bullets on MSG that night. The short item noted that “The Knicks tried double-teaming Jeff Ruland in the second of those games, but the tactic didn’t work: He responded with a triple double-digit effort — 22 points, 12 rebounds and 10 assists.”

It was Dec. 29, 1984. And for the very first time, The New York Times had cited the triple-double.

On Monday night, Russell Westbrook completed an unprecedented 10th consecutive triple-double, with 21 points, 14 rebounds and 11 assists as the Oklahoma City Thunder defeated the Portland Trail Blazers. Westbrook broke the record of nine, set by Wilt Chamberlain in 1968.

The moment Russ passed Wilt for the longest triple-double streak 🔥 pic.twitter.com/xTytZdyzDd

But while triple-doubles are no longer uncommon — Westbrook’s teammate Paul George turned in an even more immpressive line (47 points, 10 rebounds, 12 assists) on Monday — the term is relatively new. Like Chamberlain, some of the greatest practitioners made every one of their triple-doubles when triple-doubles were not even a thing.

The Times quickly embraced the triple-double. Two days after its debut, the label made it into an ordinary sports article, this time without the clunky words “digit” or “effort.” Precedent had been set.

In those early days, some of the references to triple-double in The Times were in quotes, as if editors were afraid that the new term would pollute the newspaper’s august pages. Eventually the arbiters of style settled on no quotes, and a hyphen in between the two words.

The first triple-double in Basketball-Reference’s database is from 1950, when Andy Phillip of the Philadelphia Warriors tallied 17 points, 10 rebounds and 10 assists, although there were almost certainly others before that when stat keeping was less precise and complete.

Harvey Pollack, the longtime 76ers stats guru, is generally credited with inventing the term in the early 1980s, inspired by Magic Johnson, who made a habit of triple-doubling. (Ruland, though he was the Times’s triple-double pioneer, claimed only five in his career.)

There are also double-doubles — the career record is held by Chamberlain — and quadruple doubles, for those who can also manage 10 blocks or steals. That has only happened a handful of times in the N.B.A., and not since David Robinson in 1994.

There are even quintuple doubles, a stupefying exploit — 25 points, 18 rebounds, 11 assists, 10 steals and 10 blocks — performed by the women’s star Tamika Catchings when she was in high school in 1997.

Westbrook has taken the triple-double to new heights, though, actually averaging a triple-double for the last two seasons. He is on pace to do so again this season. And unlike his early predecessors, he is keenly aware of the stat, often looking to add that one more assist or rebound that he needs late in a game.

Westbrook now has 127 total triple-doubles, closing in on Johnson, the inspiration for the term, who has 138.

But above all of them is Oscar Robertson, the only other man to average a triple-double; he had 181 in his Hall of Fame career.

His last one came in 1974, when the feat was still unnamed, at least in The Times.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

LOS ANGELES — At the midpoint of the N.B.A. season, Kyle Kuzma was daydreaming about something the Lakers have yet to unveil: a small-ball lineup with LeBron James manning the center position. The Lakers already generate the third-highest pace in the league using a traditional lineup, so imagine the possibilities.

“That small-ball lineup is going to be huge for us,” Kuzma told reporters on Wednesday morning, “especially in the playoffs when everybody’s going to be going small.”

Kuzma, a second-year forward, was making two assumptions: first, that the Lakers would make the playoffs, and second, that they would have enough time to experiment with the lineup and refine it ahead of a hypothetical trip to the postseason. Not to stamp all over Kuzma’s enthusiasm, but neither of those is a guarantee given the way the Lakers’ hodgepodge season has gone.

Coach Luke Walton, to his credit, is taking a more pragmatic approach. Though he entered the season hoping to unleash a smaller lineup that could cause mismatch problems, the Lakers do not have time to mess around with experiments, he said, not right now, not after their recent struggles, not with their continuing rash of injuries and absences.

“It’s going to get tougher to do,” Walton said, adding: “As the season gets further and further down the road, those, ‘Hey, let’s try this during the game’ — it’s going to be less and less because we’re in a pretty nasty fight for who gets in and who’s not in. So it will be more about what we’re good at, and try to get better and better at that.”

Every team copes with injuries of varying magnitudes, and the Lakers have dealt with their share. On Wednesday night, LeBron James — no longer indestructible, apparently — missed his eighth consecutive game with a strained left groin, but he looked upbeat on the home bench at Staples Center during his team’s 113-100 victory against the Detroit Pistons.

“I thought our team showed a lot of growth from, however you want to call it, the post-LeBron injury,” said Walton, whose team improved to 23-19.

An important caveat: The Pistons, who have lost 15 of their last 19 games, are not playing stellar basketball. But the LeBron-free Lakers are beginning to look more cohesive and more confident than they did in the days after they lost him to his injury on Dec. 25. They have won two straight, with James’s return date still uncertain.

After the Lakers’ medical staff evaluated James on Thursday, the team announced in a statement that he was progressing and had been cleared “to increase on-court functional basketball movements.” He is scheduled to be re-evaluated next Wednesday, but in the meantime the Lakers will play on without him, starting Friday against the Utah Jazz.

James’s absence — however long it lasts — may not wind up being the worst thing for the Lakers. His workload over the past decade-plus has been immense, with most of his seasons extending through the N.B.A. finals. He just turned 34. Assuming he returns at full strength, without complications, James could probably benefit from a midseason break.

More important, perhaps, has been the opportunity for the team’s lesser lights to operate on their own. The training wheels are off. For a while, it looked bleak. The Lakers lost five of their first six games without James, and it got bad enough that Kobe Bryant logged on to Twitter to defend Walton from an angry mob.

“Relax,” Bryant, one the franchise’s most iconic figures, wrote in a post on his account. “Entire squad is damn near out.”

At the time, the Lakers were without James, Kuzma and Rajon Rondo. Rondo could miss another two to three weeks after undergoing surgery on his right hand (for the second time this season), but Kuzma, who was sidelined for two games with a back contusion, has since returned.

On Monday, with the rust from his injury still apparent, Kuzma shot 4 of 20 from the field in a win against the Dallas Mavericks. On Tuesday, an off day for the Lakers, he went to the practice facility and took 500 shots, Walton said. On Wednesday, Kuzma scored a career-high 41 points in 29 minutes while shooting 16 of 24 from the field.

“If you would have told me two years ago, when I was in college, that I would score 40 for the Lakers, I probably wouldn’t have believed you,” Kuzma said. “Kind of crazy.”

But this is his reality at age 23, and Walton said he was also pleased with the aggressive play of Lonzo Ball and Brandon Ingram, who are both 21. They are learning as they go, and their curriculum has been more advanced in recent days.

At the same time, the Lakers have emerged as a surprisingly respectable defensive team. Entering Thursday, they ranked eighth in the league in overall defensive rating.

Asked what he knew about his team at this stage of the season, Walton said: “We know that when we’re at our best, we’re a really good team. We know that we’re a team that can hang our hat on playing defense and getting stops. We’re good when we get out and run. LeBron James is really good.”

But really, Walton said, there are probably more unknowns than knowns with this group. On only a handful of occasions has he had close to a full roster at his disposal. The rest of the league will be interested to see what the Lakers look like when he finally does.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

DENVER — Moments after the Golden State Warriors finished obliterating the Denver Nuggets on Tuesday night, Draymond Green was asked about a teammate who did not even play — a teammate, in fact, who has yet to log a single minute this season but is nearing his much-anticipated debut.

“Hopefully,” Green said, “it’s devastating for everybody else.”

Let that soak in for a second. The Warriors, who have won three of the last four N.B.A. championships, are already good at basketball. All they did on Tuesday was set an N.B.A. record by scoring 51 points in the first quarter — the first quarter! — against a team that came into the game with the best record in the Western Conference.

But now, after signing DeMarcus Cousins over the summer and spending recent months incorporating him into their dynastic fold as he recovered from Achilles’ tendon surgery, the Warriors expect him to be in their starting lineup when they visit the Los Angeles Clippers on Friday night. It is a grand experiment that will play out over the second half of the season.

“More than anything, we’re just excited for DeMarcus,” Coach Steve Kerr said late Tuesday night, adding: “It’s going to take him some time to get his rhythm.”

Cousins, a 28-year-old center and a four-time All-Star, has not played since Jan. 26, 2018, when he tore his left Achilles’ in a game for the New Orleans Pelicans. At the time, Cousins was having a career season, with averages of 25.2 points, 12.9 rebounds and 5.4 assists a game. He was also due for free agency and an enormous payday.

But his type of injury has ended careers, particularly among big men, and every team in the league balked at offering him a long-term deal. He wound up with the Warriors, who signed him to a one-year contract worth $5.3 million — a modest price for a reclamation project with upside and little obvious risk.

“It’s a relief,” Cousins told reporters last week. “It’s been a long year for me, a lot of ups and downs, but the finish line is ahead.”

There is no way of knowing if Cousins, who is listed at 6-feet-11 and 270 pounds, will ever be the top-tier player he once was. But the Warriors neither need nor expect him to be a focal point of their offense, and if he merely commands attention from defenders, especially in the post, he should free up additional space on the perimeter for the team’s cavalcade of shooters.

“We haven’t had a player like him before, so it will be new,” Kerr said. “It won’t be a simple ‘plug him in and he’ll fit right in.’ We’ll play through him some, so there will be a period where we have to adapt. Fortunately, we’re halfway through the year. We have a lot of games to figure this out.”

Since the Warriors began collecting championships under Kerr in 2015, they have had a rotating cast of dependable but unspectacular centers: Andrew Bogut, Festus Ezeli, Zaza Pachulia, JaVale McGee. Cousins has never been a role player, though he acknowledged his new (and unfamiliar) place in the Warriors’ ecosystem.

“Well,” he said, “I won’t be taking as many shots as I have in the past.”

He also has a reputation for being emotional, and something of an antagonist. Some of the Warriors have firsthand experience. Kerr recalled getting ejected after arguing with the officials in a game against the Sacramento Kings in 2017, back when Cousins was playing for them. But before he left the court, Kerr caught Cousins taunting him by waving goodbye.

Then there was an episode last season, when Cousins was playing for the Pelicans, and he got into an altercation with Kevin Durant. After both players were ejected, Cousins tried to track down Durant outside the Warriors’ locker room — and not to exchange pleasantries.

“It shows that you care,” Cousins said of playing with passion. “It shows that it means something to you. I’m not really fans of the guys who are emotionless on the floor.”

Nuggets Coach Mike Malone, who briefly coached Cousins in Sacramento, said he enjoyed the experience.

“I loved coaching him,” Malone said. “I think he’s a player that’s misunderstood, and when you have a chance to know him, you realize who he is as a player and as a person. And when he’s healthy, he’s one of the more unstoppable big men in the N.B.A.”

Malone compared Cousins to Nikola Jokic, the Nuggets’ fourth-year center and an emerging multidimensional force.

“He can score inside, and he can score outside,” Malone said of Cousins. “He can handle the ball, and he can make his teammates better.”

Malone said he expected that Cousins would give the Warriors “a big lift,” and Malone made those remarks before the Nuggets’ 142-111 loss to the Warriors.

The Warriors have had their struggles this season, although these things tend to be relative. Green beefed with Durant. Stephen Curry missed 11 games with a strained groin. Klay Thompson labored through an early-season shooting slump that he refused to acknowledge as an early-season shooting slump. And they have lost more games than they usually do.

The Warriors have been rolling of late, though, winning seven of their last eight before their game against the Pelicans on Wednesday night. They appear to be playing their best basketball of the season, as evidenced by their demolition of the Nuggets, a rout so thorough that Malone said it would be impossible for his team to just “flush” the loss and forget it.

But now, as the Warriors get ready to introduce Cousins to their explosive mix, there are questions: Can he play with pace? Can he acclimate himself to a supporting role? Can he defend quicker players if opponents go small against him? And most important, can he stay healthy and find his old form ahead of the playoffs?

The Warriors are eager to find out.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Kevin Draper

CHARLOTTE, N.C. — After two weeks of Anthony Davis’s trade request dominating conversation around the N.B.A., Commissioner Adam Silver on Saturday sounded sanguine about any possible negative effects it was having on the league.

“Some of the greatest players in the history of this league have demanded trades at various points of their contracts,” he said at his annual All-Star weekend address. He went on to say that there was “very little” he could do to completely stop players from trying to force trades.

Davis was fined $50,000 for the public trade request made by his agent, Rich Paul. Silver said it was healthy for players and their agents to have ongoing conversations with their teams about future intentions, but that he preferred that such conversations happen behind closed doors. As for the frenzy of news media attention surrounding Davis and his possible destination this summer, Silver said the “public spectacle” wasn’t the type of media interest the league wanted.

“We certainly are becoming a 52-week-a-year sport, and it’s largely the result of tremendous interest in these players,” he said. “I think we could do a better job as a league in avoiding those situations where they get to the point where players are maybe demanding they be traded or, worst-case scenario, saying, ‘I’m not going to honor my contract.’”

[Slam Dunk Contest: Hamidou Diallo’s Dunk Is Even Better Viewed Frame by Frame]

Silver has frequently stated a desire to improve the N.B.A.’s competitive balance. Asked whether small-market teams could compete with large-market franchises, Silver largely disputed the premise without even citing the fact that the Milwaukee Bucks, a small-market club, currently have the best winning percentage in the league.

He took the opposite approach.

“I’m not even sure where the line is anymore on big markets,” he said, pointing out that the Los Angeles Lakers, New York Knicks and Chicago Bulls — teams that play in major cities — have struggled on the court in recent years.

Silver also said it was too early to judge whether reforms to the draft lottery, intended to reduce the incentive to tank in pursuit of a high draft pick, were having the intended effect. Four teams this year are on pace to win fewer than 20 games, but Silver said there is also an unusually large number still in contention for a playoff berth.

“I personally don’t think it is a winning strategy over the long term, losing for multiple years,” said Silver. He also said that choosing to be uncompetitive for an extended period of time would most likely have a “corrosive’’ effect on any team that took that approach.

Taken together, Silver’s responses to questions suggested that he was relatively happy with the state of the N.B.A. and believed that the league’s problems could be solved through tweaks to the system, not wholesale changes.

Silver opened the news conference by addressing House Bill 2, the law passed in North Carolina in 2016 that invalidated local government ordinances establishing anti-discrimination protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people and required people in publicly owned buildings to use restrooms that corresponded with the genders listed on their birth certificates. In response to the law, the N.B.A. took the All-Star Game, originally scheduled to be played in Charlotte in 2017, away from the city.

He said it was the view of the league office that the law discriminated against the LGBTQ community, and subsequently the N.B.A. made the decision that it was “inconsistent with the values of this league to play the All-Star Game here under those circumstances.” The N.B.A. decided to return after the law was partially repealed.

Asked about efforts to improve the culture of the Dallas Mavericks, where a league investigation found numerous instances of sexual harassment and improper conduct among employees, Silver offered few specifics but said there was a “complete sea change in culture on the business side” of the organization.

Earlier Saturday, the N.B.A., in partnership with the International Basketball Federation, announced the formation of the Basketball Africa League, a 12-team professional league made up of clubs from across Africa. The league will begin play in 2020, the first time that the N.B.A. will be involved in the operation of a league outside of North America.

Many details, including which clubs from which countries will be part of the league, have yet to be finalized, but Silver did say that former President Barack Obama would be involved in the league in an unspecified capacity.

Email Kevin Draper at kevin.draper@nytimes.com or follow him on Twitter: @kevinmdraper.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Stein

[Want to read more from Marc Stein? Sign up for his free weekly newsletter here.]

Andrew Bogut made his return to the N.B.A. on Wednesday, signing a rest-of-the-season contract to rejoin the Golden State Warriors. The reunion came two years to the day since Bogut, the former No. 1 overall selection in the 2005 draft, sustained a gruesome leg injury.

Bogut, 34, spent this season starring for the Sydney Kings in his native Australia and, by his own admission, was convinced “that the N.B.A. door had shut.”

But the Warriors began lobbying Bogut to rejoin them in December and made it to March with a roster opening for the 7-foot center, who wasn’t available to be signed until the Kings’ season ended last weekend.

“I was kind of blown away,” Bogut said in a telephone interview from Australia. “This wasn’t a situation where I threw my hat in the ring to try to get signed in the N.B.A. I wouldn’t do that.

“To come back to the N.B.A., for me, was basically Golden State or nothing. But the fact it was Golden State — it was the kind of opportunity that I would be kicking myself if I didn’t take.”

When Bogut signed a two-year deal with Sydney last April, he described it as “my official retirement from the N.B.A.” He proceeded to win Most Valuable Player and Defensive Player of the Year honors in Australia’s National Basketball League, averaging 11.4 points, 11.6 rebounds, 3.4 assists and 2.7 blocks per game.

Bogut’s contract with Sydney does not contain an N.B.A. release clause, but he told the Warriors that he would entertain the prospect of rejoining them on a short-term basis after the Australian season — as long as Sydney officials blessed it — should Golden State still have a need.

Had the Warriors succeeded in landing a recent free agent from the so-called “buyout” market — such as the swingman Wesley Matthews, who opted to sign with Indiana after securing his release from the Knicks — they would have had no roster room for Bogut.

But once it became clear that the Chicago Bulls would refuse to release the veteran center Robin Lopez before March 1, thus missing deadline for Lopez to retain his playoff eligibility with a new team, Golden State intensified its pursuit of Bogut as soon as the Kings were eliminated from the N.B.L. playoffs.

As the Warriors continue to try to assimilate the former All-Star center DeMarcus Cousins into their rotation, Bogut said he had “no illusions” about the fact that “some games I’ll play and some games I won’t.” But Bogut insisted he was “happy to be a positive influence on that bench” no matter how much he plays.

The Warriors assistant general manager Larry Harris, who was Milwaukee’s general manager in 2005 when the Bucks selected Bogut with the top pick in the draft, made a recent scouting trip to Australia to assess the state of Bogut’s game firsthand and convey the seriousness of Golden State’s interest.

Warriors Coach Steve Kerr referred to Bogut as “an insurance policy in the frontcourt.” But Bogut’s defensive know-how and his familiarity with the Warriors’ star trio of Stephen Curry, Klay Thompson and Draymond Green certainly can’t hurt the league’s prohibitive championship favorites in the quest to improve on their woeful standing of 16th in defensive efficiency (109.5 points allowed per 100 possessions.)

“I didn’t foresee this happening but I’m excited as hell about it,” Green told Bay Area reporters. He and Bogut quickly meshed as co-anchors of a vaunted Golden State defense in 2014-15, when the Warriors began their five-season run of dominance.

After the Warriors won a league-record 73 games in 2015-16 but blew a 3-1 lead to the LeBron James-led Cavaliers in the N.B.A. finals, Bogut and the veteran forward Harrison Barnes were quickly jettisoned to Dallas to create the requisite salary-cap space for Golden State to sign Kevin Durant.

Bogut, though, said that returning to the Warriors nearly three years later to play alongside Durant would not “be weird” despite the contentious nature of his departure.

“The Golden State Warriors are a very special organization in my heart,” Bogut said. “I had a lot of great years there and won a championship. Even though they moved me, it was understandable to get a guy like Kevin Durant. I probably would have traded myself if I had the same opportunity.”

It was Bogut’s longtime agent, David Bauman of Independent Sports and Entertainment, who first pointed out to him that Wednesday’s signing with the Warriors coincided with the two-year anniversary of the fractured tibia in his left leg that Bogut sustained 56 seconds into his Cleveland Cavaliers debut in March 2017.

“It’s just funny how the world works sometimes,” Bogut said. “This is an unbelievable opportunity that I’m really thankful for.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Times Insider

For basketball reporters, April means it’s time to kiss the family goodbye and set off on the year’s most thrilling — and exhausting — reporting trail.

By Harvey Araton

Times Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together.

The N.B.A. playoffs begin this weekend, which for those who report regularly on the world’s premier professional basketball league means one thing: the temporary suspension of life as they know it.

If it’s April, it’s time to tie up loose ends at home, kiss the significant other or beloved cat goodbye and wish the kids well on the soccer pitch. Someone please remember to send Mother’s Day flowers. Father’s Day will be celebrated pending the length of the finals.

The reporting grind of the 82-game regular season is disruptively hectic enough. But during the postseason, the sport sheds its least watchable teams, as well as a few that are competitively marginal, and gets down to the games that conclusively matter.

Breakout performances will become instant classics. Acknowledged stars could transition into legends with championship rings. Nothing may be missed in the postseason business of media-driven mythmaking.

Will Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors win a fourth ring in June, bringing him within two of Michael Jordan’s and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar’s half-dozen each (though still far behind Bill Russell’s 11)? Or will destiny call upon a first-timer like the so-called Greek Freak, Giannis Antetokounmpo of the rising Milwaukee Bucks?

As a sports reporter and columnist for four decades, the last 25 years of which were with The Times, the playoffs habitually meant two months of missing the springtime sun and — by the early 1990s — my two young sons, while chasing the extended N.B.A. family of one-name luminaries. (You know who I mean: Magic, Larry, Michael, LeBron.)

Throughout the playoffs, reporters must confront the crush of late-night deadlines while nattily dressed superstars complicate filing by taking their sweet time getting to the interview podium. Hours later, it’s on to the next city, the next round, often dealing with the logistical conundrum of never being sure when one series will end and the next will begin.

For a portion of my years on the basketball beat, that meant attaching myself to the Knicks, who children of a certain age might have a hard time believing consistently qualified for the playoffs. That was way back in the 1990s, otherwise known around New York as the Patrick Ewing Era.

When Ewing’s Knicks were ousted, it was on to chronicle Michael Jordan and his Chicago Bulls as they accumulated six titles in eight years, disbanding in 1998 and ceding short-term control of the sport to the Los Angeles Lakers of Shaquille O’Neal and Kobe Bryant. And so it went, into a new century that spawned even greater global exposure and scrutiny of a virtual one-man industry, LeBron James Inc.

For those having slept through the last six months, James will not be appearing in the 2019 playoffs after a gargantuan run of reaching the league championship series for eight straight years. His migration to Hollywood from Cleveland produced a critically assailed version of Lakers Showtime that, had he not signed a four-year contract last summer, would have already been canceled. (The Lakers’ hope of attracting a worthy co-star is as yet unrealized.)

Hence, the fortunes of the soon-to-be free agents Kevin Durant, Kawhi Leonard and others will be fascinating spring subplots. No reporters worth their credentials will risk blinking through a telltale expression or a body-language betrayal of otherwise guarded intentions.

The playoffs, while typically impassioned and illuminating, are also logistically exhausting, but I confidently speak for my N.B.A. media brethren when I say that covering them is far more privilege than punishment.

The game looks much different now — so much of it focused on 3-point shooting — than it did during my earliest years on the N.B.A. beat. Back then, I routinely insisted there was no place in the world I would rather be than the old, ventilation-challenged Boston Garden for a showdown between the Celtics and Lakers. The modern and far more international N.B.A. media no doubt is equally passionate.

But lives do change. Issues arise. We in the ever-more-distant press-row seats do not attend games with traditional partisan interests, but over the long playoff haul, personal circumstances and needs do create some dilemmas.

Consider my plight in the final seconds of Game 6 of the 1993 finals between Jordan’s Bulls and Charles Barkley’s Phoenix Suns. The Bulls were leading in the series three games to two, but were trailing by 2 points while trying to avoid playing a seventh game in a hostile road arena.

Back home in Brooklyn, my wife was seven months pregnant with our second child while simultaneously preparing to sell our co-op and buy a house in New Jersey. Had the Bulls lost Game 6, I would not have made it home until the night before both closings and the move.

Fortunately for me, if not the Suns, all five Bulls touched the ball on a play that produced a historically clutch 3-point shot by John Paxson. The Bulls’ bid for a third straight title survived, along with my marriage.

Harvey Araton is the editor and annotator of “Elevated: The Global Rise of the N.B.A.” (Triumph), an archival book of selected works by the staff of The New York Times. Follow the @ReaderCenter on Twitter for more coverage highlighting your perspectives and experiences and for insight into how we work.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Marc Stein

With all of the trade drama surrounding Anthony Davis and Kristaps Porzingis, the N.B.A. intruded on the N.F.L.’s run-up to the Super Bowl as we have not seen since Kobe Bryant scored 81 points on football’s so-called Championship Sunday in 2006.

Now that the Super Bowl is over and even more of North America’s sporting consciousness is there to be seized by professional basketball’s tireless headline-makers, here is our best advice: Buckle up.

What follows is a by-the-numbers look at what the N.B.A.’s 73rd season has served up so far — and what the next five months hold.

Through Sunday’s games, only the Milwaukee Bucks were on a 60-win pace. The Bucks’ Eastern Conference-leading record of 38-13 projects to a 61-win campaign — which could keep this season from being the league’s first since 2000-1 without a 60-win club.

There are realistically 11 teams battling for the Western Conference’s eight playoff spots, after the new calendar year began with 14 teams in the conference — all but Phoenix — in the race. Dallas, New Orleans and Memphis have dropped off in January, prompting all three teams to focus more on trades than the standings.

The consensus top three in the Most Valuable Player Award race coming out of Super Bowl weekend are Milwaukee’s Giannis Antetokounmpo, Houston’s James Harden and Denver’s Nikola Jokic. According to the Basketball-Reference.com M.V.P. Award Tracker, Antetokounmpo awoke Sunday with a 37.8 percent chance of winning — far ahead of Harden’s 21.1 percent.

Harden has scored at least 30 points in 26 consecutive games, good for the third-longest such streak in N.B.A. annals behind Wilt Chamberlain’s streaks of 65 and 31.

The league’s trade deadline (Thursday at 3 p.m. Eastern) is three days away. This is the second season since 1978-79 (as far back as reliable N.B.A. record-keeping goes) that the deadline falls before the All-Star Game.

The New Orleans Pelicans have made two trips to the playoffs — winning only one series — in Davis’s first six seasons with the team. Davis requested a trade on Jan. 28.

It took 54 days for the Minnesota Timberwolves to find a trade they liked for Jimmy Butler after Butler’s request to be dealt became public Sept. 18. Butler was snubbed by East coaches in All-Star voting, but the potential ceiling for Philadelphia’s rugged new star threesome was evident Thursday night at Golden State, when Joel Embiid, Ben Simmons, Butler and Company brought a halt to the longest winning streak of the season — after the Warriors had won 11 in a row.

Minnesota is 21-18 since the trade that sent Butler and Justin Patton to Philadelphia on Nov. 12 — and 6-6 since firing Tom Thibodeau, the coach/team president who made it, on Jan. 6. Ryan Saunders, Thibodeau’s 32-year-old replacement, has many admirers around the league, but the Wolves are a long way from convincing skeptics that the deal (to bring in Robert Covington, Dario Saric, Jerryd Bayless and a 2022 second-round pick) was sufficient for a player of Butler’s caliber.

Thibodeau is one of three coaches to be fired this season — after nine coaching changes in the off-season. The other coaches to lose their jobs since opening night: Cleveland’s Tyronn Lue and Chicago’s Fred Hoiberg.

There were 20 teams, entering Sunday’s play, attempting at least 30 3-pointers a game. This is poised to become the first season in N.B.A. history that the leaguewide average per game (31.4) will finish in the 30s.

With coaches calling for more 3-pointers than ever before and greenlighting shots earlier and earlier in the 24-second shot clock — along with a new rule that resets the shot clock at 14 seconds on offensive rebounds — teams are averaging 100.0 possessions per 48 minutes leaguewide. The last N.B.A. season in which that figure finished in triple digits was 1988-89 (100.6).

Milwaukee’s Khris Middleton, Orlando’s Nikola Vucevic, Philadelphia’s Simmons and Denver’s Jokic will make their All-Star Game debuts Feb. 17 in Charlotte, N.C. The All-Star player draft, in which the captains LeBron James and Antetokounmpo will fill out 13-man rosters by picking players playground-style, is Thursday at 7 p.m. — just four hours after the trade deadline passes. (D’Angelo Russell of the Nets, who was named later as a replacement for Indiana’s Victor Oladipo, who is injured, will also be making his All-Star debut this year.)

Four teams are in contention for the league’s worst record: Phoenix (11-43), Cleveland (11-42), Chicago (12-41) and, of course, the Knicks (10-42). The teams that finish in the bottom three will share a 14 percent chance of landing the No. 1 overall pick in the draft in June in the first year of the league’s revised lottery system.

San Antonio sits a surprising fifth in the West, at 32-22, in its first season since trading Kawhi Leonard to Toronto in July. The Spurs are bidding for a record 22nd consecutive playoff berth, a streak that began in Gregg Popovich’s first full season as Spurs coach in 1997-98.

At 27-25, Sacramento is on course to post its first winning record since the 2005-6 season. But the Kings will have to leapfrog at least two teams to stop the league’s longest playoff drought (12 seasons). The Suns (nine seasons) and the Orlando Magic (seven) are on course to extend their own playoff droughts.

The Lakers’ playoff drought will hit a hard-to-believe six seasons in a row if James cannot save Los Angeles over its final 29 games. James just missed 17 consecutive games with a strained groin — the longest injury absence of his pro career — and is at risk for missing the postseason for the first time since his second N.B.A. season, in 2004-5.

Carmelo Anthony finally became an unrestricted free agent on Sunday after clearing waivers nearly three months after the Houston Rockets sent him away in November after just 10 games together. The Rockets traded Anthony to Chicago on Jan. 21; the Bulls, who needed a roster spot, waived him Friday without him spending a single second with the team.

In the seven games Golden State has deployed a lineup of DeMarcus Cousins, Stephen Curry, Kevin Durant, Klay Thompson and Draymond Green, that group is averaging 127.1 points per 100 possessions in 54 minutes. Call it a small but ominous sample size.

Oddsmakers in Las Vegas have the Warriors as overwhelming favorites to win their third consecutive championship and fourth in five seasons. According to ActionNetwork.com, Golden State is -225 to win it all, meaning that you would have to bet $225 to win $100. Boston, Milwaukee and Toronto are next in line at +1,000, meaning that a $100 bet would win $1,000 if any of those teams won the title.

One scribe’s ranking of the top 10 players who could be unrestricted free agents July 1: Durant, Leonard, Kyrie Irving, Thompson, Butler, Kemba Walker, Cousins, Middleton, Marc Gasol and Tobias Harris.

The N.B.A. playoffs start April 13.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

The Mavericks rookie is drawing LeBron James comparisons and has “fast-forwarded” his team’s decision-making.

By Marc Stein

DALLAS — Dirk Nowitzki has seen many things in his 21 seasons with the Dallas Mavericks. What he had never seen, until last month, was a fellow Maverick who could attract nearly two dozen autograph seekers in subzero temperatures to greet the team bus on a Thursday morning in Detroit.

Luka Doncic did just that in the 2 a.m. hour of Jan. 31, as the Mavericks pulled into a hotel adjacent to the world headquarters of General Motors, on the unglamorous end of a back-to-back set that began in New York.

It is likewise safe to presume that none of Nowitzki’s other 197 teammates over two decades in Dallas could have inspired what happened mere hours later. In a swift-moving blockbuster trade, Dallas acquired Kristaps Porzingis from the Knicks to serve as Doncic’s sidekick, with Mavericks General Manager Donnie Nelson openly admitting that he pushed for the deal because Doncic has “fast-forwarded a lot of our decision-making.”

These are the tales from just one day, albeit maybe the wildest day, of what Nowitzki frequently refers to as Lukamania.

“When we get to cities now, even late at night, there are so many people waiting with things for him to sign that it’s almost like we’re the Warriors,” Nowitzki said. “Lukamania is real. We’re living it every day.”

[Another Rookie: The Perimeter Can’t Protect You From Mitchell Robinson]

This week brings another milestone for Doncic, who celebrates his 20th birthday on Thursday. He is averaging 20.9 points, 7.2 rebounds and 5.7 assists through 56 games and is responsible for four of the five triple-doubles in N.B.A. history recorded by teenagers. It is a start that has quickly validated Nelson’s long-held belief that Doncic possessed superstar potential.

The only other rookie in league history to hit those levels over a full season was Oscar Robertson in 1960-61.

“I love, love, love guys that can pass the ball,” Nelson said, prioritizing Doncic’s ability to run a team at 6 feet 7 inches over the fact he is already known for having the league’s second-most-feared step-back jump shot, behind only James Harden’s.

“I knew I could play over here,” Doncic said, “but it’s better than I expected, for sure.”

The gaudy numbers and worldwide interest in his exploits enabled Doncic to amass more than four million votes in N.B.A. All-Star balloting, trailing only LeBron James and Giannis Antetokounmpo. Doncic, in other words, finished higher in leaguewide balloting than Michael Jordan (fifth) did as a rookie. Higher, too, than James (13th) and even Yao Ming, who could manage only the fourth-highest total in 2003 despite the considerable voting might of Yao’s native China.

Doncic’s instant production has also validated every pundit who insisted, amid no shortage of skepticism, that concerns about Doncic’s athleticism and corresponding ability to deal with the length of N.B.A. defenders were folly given the rampant success he achieved both at the club (Real Madrid) and national team (Slovenia) levels as an 18-year-old. In the process, Doncic has unleashed a torrent of second-guessing upon the teams (Phoenix, Sacramento and Atlanta) that let him slip to the Mavericks. 

Yet Doncic insists his maiden N.B.A. season, which appears destined to be christened with the league’s rookie of the year trophy, has not been as easy it looks.

The Mavericks, you see, were 26-34 entering Wednesday night’s home date with Indiana and likely to miss the playoffs for a third consecutive season. They have traded away all four of Doncic’s projected fellow starters (Dennis Smith Jr., DeAndre Jordan, Wes Matthews and Harrison Barnes) in deals that netted Porzingis and roughly $30 million in salary-cap space, neither of which can help the team this season.

It is the first time in Doncic’s life, since he took up basketball at age 7, that he has experienced losing. One hint of how well he’s coping with it: Doncic has pulled his jersey apart in frustration after a play gone awry — twice.

“It’s harder than people think,” Doncic said.

“He’s a winner — he won everything in Europe,” Juancho Hernangomez of the Denver Nuggets said. “So every time he loses, he gets so mad.”

Hernangomez has been observing Doncic from close range for years, both on the floor — since Doncic played alongside Hernangomez’s brother, Charlotte’s Willy Hernangomez, at Real Madrid — and through their shared WhatsApp chat room, which houses various European players fond of the popular video game Fortnite. But Mavericks officials are not worried about a scouting report from a friend that paints Doncic as a sore loser.

“He doesn’t handle losing well — I know that for a fact,” Dallas Coach Rick Carlisle said. “But I don’t handle losing well, either.”

As recently as May 15, Mavericks executives were worried about Doncic — big time. Having known for more than a year that they wanted to draft him if they had the chance, team officials were crestfallen in Chicago when Dallas slipped from a projected No. 3 in that night’s draft lottery to No. 5. 

“It was devastating for us,” Nelson said. “We thought our chance to get him was gone because it’s really hard to trade up in the lottery.” 

Nowitzki betrayed a public hint of the organization’s disappointment when he tweeted this reaction: “Of course.”

To move up high enough, Dallas ultimately had to persuade the Atlanta Hawks to surrender the No. 3 overall pick. It cost Dallas both the No. 5 pick, which Atlanta used to take Trae Young, as well as the Mavericks’ top pick in the 2019 draft. 

But the Dallas owner, Mark Cuban, blessed the deal, even at that price, because Nelson lobbied so hard for it. Five years earlier, during the 2013 draft, Nelson and his longtime international scout, Tony Ronzone, pushed for the Mavericks to use the No. 13 pick on a little-known Greek teenager named Giannis Antetokounmpo. Cuban wouldn’t allow it, given that Antetokounmpo, unlike Doncic, was mostly a mystery — and promptly regretted it as Antetokounmpo blossomed into a star in Milwaukee.

So this time, after the disappointment of the lottery, Cuban blessed Nelson to do whatever it took to land Doncic. What the team got was the son of a former Slovene pro — Sasa Doncic — and a veteran of three full seasons in the EuroLeague and Spain’s La Liga with Real Madrid after Luka Doncic made his pro debut at 16.

To the Mavericks’ delight, Doncic was more N.B.A.-ready than they ever dreamed — as his 16-for-29 shooting in the final three minutes of one-possession games this season would suggest. As Carlisle put it: “Unique background, unique skill set, unique body type.”

“I hesitate to throw out names like LeBron James and Magic Johnson, who have been do-everything kind of stars, but it’s pretty clear now that Luka has many of those same traits and has proven that he can do a lot of those things,” Carlisle said. “He has deceptive size, strength and quickness — and an understanding beyond his years on how to use his body to make plays and draw fouls.”

Carlisle is hardly alone in making such lofty comparisons. Miami’s Dwyane Wade, one of the league’s foremost James experts after their four seasons together with the Heat, has called Doncic’s passing “LeBron-like.” 

Los Angeles Clippers Coach Doc Rivers said of Doncic: “He’s my favorite player to watch almost, and not talking just rookies. First of all, he plays with a great joy — I love that. And he’s just so advanced in the way he plays. The sky’s the limit for him. Wait until he gets in shape.”

Rivers was laughing when he tacked on that last line, but he did hit on a prime area of Year 1 concern with Doncic — conditioning.

The Mavericks and Doncic’s representatives, headed by the longtime N.B.A. agent Bill Duffy, agreed shortly after the draft to impose as much rest on Doncic as possible from July through September after a nonstop run at the highest levels of international basketball for nearly a year. Doncic thus began the season heavier than his listed weight of 218 and has absorbed jibes about his diet ever since.

But Mavericks officials are pleased with the gradual changes in Doncic’s dietary habits. At the team’s behest, Doncic hired a chef in December to prepare a number of meals for pregame and off-night consumption. Doncic has also begun working fresh juices into his routine.

In Madrid, Doncic lived for the past two and a half years with his mother, Mirjam Poterbin, who raised Doncic while running two beauty salons in Ljubljana. (Doncic has long declined to discuss his father.)

In Dallas, mom and son live separately near the American Airlines Center as Doncic grows into his independence, but still within walking distance.

“This was his dream,” Poterbin said. “At 7 years old he was already talking about N.B.A. I cry a lot of times.”

Yet there have been Year 1 challenges and disappointments for Doncic amid the Lukamania — and beyond the ever-present adjustment to playing for a team with scant postseason prospects.

He watched helplessly as his fellow Spanish-speaking teammate J.J. Barea suffered a season-ending Achilles’ tear in January. He lived through his first big trade, seeing Dallas abruptly abort its planned Doncic/Smith Jr. partnership when the chance arose to acquire his pal Porzingis.

“I was shocked,” Doncic said. “Europe doesn’t work like this.”

Doncic has also struggled at times with his free throws, converting just 72.6 percent this season despite proving so adept at getting to the line (6.4 times per game). Mom, meanwhile, admitted that Doncic was “quite sad at first” about missing out on an All-Star spot because of a format change in which fan balloting, as of last season, only accounts for 50 percent of the equation for determining starters.

The good news: These all rank as welcome tests — even the Mavericks’ sub-.500 record — compared to the early hurdles posed by the transition Doncic faced at 13. That was his tender age when Doncic left his mother back in Slovenia to enter the Real Madrid academy.

“There are no words to describe this, really,” Poterbin said. “Honestly I would not go through it again.”

“It was way harder,” Doncic said, “than coming from Madrid to here.”

Marc Stein is a sports reporter specializing in N.B.A. coverage, with occasional forays into soccer and tennis. He spent nearly 15 years at ESPN before coming to The Times.  @TheSteinLine • Facebook 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Kelly Whiteside

In a rookie season that has resembled a seismograph, Knicks forward Kevin Knox needed a performance like Sunday’s against the Los Angeles Lakers. He scored 19 points with an array of shots, slashing to the basket, hitting a step-back 3-pointer while guarded by LeBron James and finishing with finesse on a driving, left-handed layup.

“Hello, Kevin Knox. It was good to see him play well,” Knicks Coach David Fizdale said. “He’s had his bumps. We know it’s there, it’s in there. It’s just a matter of the ball going in and him getting his confidence up. But I really thought he came with a mind-set that he was going to get out of this rut. The way he was attacking, the force he was playing with.”

Knox shot 8 of 14 from the field and 3 of 5 from 3-point range in the Knicks’ 124-123 victory over the Lakers, their 14th win in a dismal season.

“I’d been struggling a little bit, but the whole team and coaching staff had confidence in me,” Knox said. “I came to work every single day, got up extra shots. I knew I was going to come out of the streak, so I just wanted to make sure I kept shooting.”

Last year the Knicks selected Knox, a freshman from Kentucky, in the first round of the draft, ninth over all. After an ankle sprain sidelined him at the start of the season, Knox’s play took off in December, when he averaged 17.1 points and was named the Eastern Conference rookie of the month.

Knox, 19, hit the rookie wall beginning in mid-January, with a 20-game stretch in which he shot 31.8 percent from the field and 27.7 from beyond the 3-point arc. The slump started soon after he scored 31 points, his highest total in the N.B.A., during a game against the Philadelphia 76ers.

Shortly before that, Knox had said that he was still learning how to adjust to the demands of the long N.B.A. schedule and its 48-minute games, compared with a 40 minutes in college and A.A.U. ball.

“It’s totally different,” he said in late December. “Eight minutes doesn’t seem like a lot, but it really is. That’s a whole quarter almost. Eight minutes is a long time in basketball.”

To improve his fitness, Knox did extra sprints after practice and spent more time on the treadmill, running spurts of 15 minutes with the last two as fast as he could.

At various points in the season, Fizdale has brought in former Knicks greats like Bernard King, Patrick Ewing, Bill Bradley and Walt Frazier to speak to his young, struggling team. (The coach, who was a Miami Heat assistant coach when James played for them, also made a point of introducing Knox to the Lakers star after Sunday’s game.)

King, who was with the Knicks for five seasons in the mid-1980s, and was known for his seemingly unstoppable baseline turnaround jump shot, has focused especially on mentoring Knox.

In between their meetings early in the season, Knox studied online video highlights from King’s career.

“He helps my game, every time I talk to him,” Knox said. “He’s kind of like me, a wing that gets to the basket, loves transition. He kind of reminds me of myself.”

Perhaps the other way around, rook.

Knox said he had sought out his own tutors as well, connecting with Chris Bosh, Grant Hill, Jalen Rose, Carmelo Anthony and former Kentucky players for bits of advice during the trying moments.

After Monday night’s 128-92 loss in Toronto, the Knicks had 11 games left in the season, all of them meaningless, except for their effect on the draft. The three teams with the lowest win totals will each have a 14 percent of landing the No. 1 selection in June, which presumably will be the Duke freshman Zion Williamson.

The Knicks, who have the worst record in the league (14-57), are expected to lose their way into one of those slots, even after that uplifting win against the Lakers, which ended when the Knicks’ Mario Hezonja blocked a shot by James in the waning seconds.

“We had a lot of ups and downs this season,” Knox said afterward. “It was big-time win, the first sweep of the season. It’s just a great way to win in the Garden, in the last 10 seconds, against one of the best players to ever play the game and we get a defensive stop with the crowd standing up yelling.”

At a critical stretch in the fourth quarter, the Knicks had its three rookies on the court — Knox, center Mitchell Robinson, guard Allonzo Trier — plus guard Kadeem Allen, who was just called up from the Westchester developmental team, and forward Lance Thomas, the longest-tenured Knick.

“There’s a process that needs to happen, and ours is growth, making sure the young guys are getting the experience they need in order to be good in this league,” Thomas said. “A lot of young guys don’t get to play especially extended minutes in their first year. It’s a learning experience for young guys. Our goal is to fast-track them.”

Knox is sixth in the league among rookies in minutes played per game, at 28, despite shooting a subpar 36.4 percent from the field and struggling with weakside defense. He is averaging 12.3 points with 4.3 rebounds.

Even so, Fizdale has never considered sending Knox to Westchester to work on his game in the anonymity of the G League “because our team was already like a glorified G League team,” Fizdale told reporters last week. Because his rookies played substantial minutes all season, he said, he thought it was better for them to take their knocks against the best.

Such as James on Sunday and Toronto’s Kawhi Leonard on Monday.

“Welcome to the league, kid,” Fizdale said. “This is what it’s about. This is why I wanted him in this. Take those lumps now. Later on in his career, no one will remember this stuff when he is the guy beating up on kids. This is all good for him.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

LOS ANGELES — The Los Angeles Lakers described last weekend’s N.B.A. All-Star break as an opportunity for a much-needed reset, with the hope that they could ultimately make a playoff push after spending a few days apart. None of it sounded very convincing.

But when the team reconvened for practice on Wednesday morning, LeBron James said his level of intensity had been “activated,” as if he were a superhero who had flipped a switch. He does not usually activate himself this early in the season, he said, but the Lakers need all of him now — in large part because they had lost so much ground when he was sidelined for about a month with a groin injury.

“We would have loved to have had success when I was out, but we didn’t, so this is where we are right now,” James said.

And when asked how he would elevate the play of his younger teammates, he put it simply: “We don’t have a choice.”

In other words, it was sink or swim for the Lakers before their game against the Houston Rockets on Thursday night, and there would be no lifeguard.

For one night, at least, the Lakers swam. They were cohesive enough to come away with a 111-106 victory against one of the better teams in the Western Conference. For one night, at least, the Lakers showed that they could erase a 19-point deficit by playing solid defense and making their free throws. For one night, at least, the Lakers could depend on players like Brandon Ingram (27 points, 13 rebounds) and Kyle Kuzma (18 points) to deliver in a game that the team really needed to win.

The question now is whether the Lakers, who at 29-29 are the very definition of average, can build off it. Consistency has not been their hallmark.

“It can give us some momentum that we need,” Coach Luke Walton said, “or it can do nothing. It depends how we respond to this.”

Not so long ago, the Lakers had a similarly galvanizing win — or so it seemed.

It was Feb. 7, and before the league’s trade deadline Magic Johnson, the team’s president of basketball operations, had failed in his quest to ship nearly half of the roster to the New Orleans Pelicans in exchange for the All-Star center Anthony Davis. It was a huge soap opera, and the Lakers responded in surprising fashion: by going out that night and defeating the Boston Celtics — on the road, no less.

The win, though, was fool’s gold. The Lakers got pulverized by the Philadelphia 76ers three days later, then hobbled into the All-Star break with a loss to the Atlanta Hawks — a performance so devoid of energy that it seemed to signal a dysfunctional locker room, and maybe even one that was beyond repair.

The team was below .500.

Walton encouraged his players to reflect and refocus over the break. For James, that meant returning to Los Angeles in playoff mode — much earlier than he would prefer.

But this is unfamiliar territory for James, a three-time champion who has made 13 straight trips to the playoffs and eight straight appearances in the N.B.A. finals. Now, with an inexperienced batch of teammates on the Lakers, he is merely fighting to lead them into the postseason.

“I’m all about being uncomfortable,” he said this week. “I love being uncomfortable. I fall in love with being uncomfortable, so this is another uncomfortable thing for me, and I love it.”

Then he must have loved what happened against the Rockets (33-25), who built a gaping lead in the third quarter behind James Harden. But the Lakers dominated the fourth quarter by limiting the Rockets to 36.8 percent shooting and forcing six turnovers. James finished with 29 points, 11 rebounds and 6 assists.

“He’s had more of a serious focus on his face, about him, the last two days, even in the practice facility,” Walton said, adding: “I think he recognizes where we’re at and the sense of urgency we need to play with.”

The Lakers also benefited from the fresh presence of Reggie Bullock, a versatile wing whom they acquired from the Detroit Pistons at the trade deadline. Bullock scored 14 points and defended the Rockets’ James Harden for long stretches. For a team that lacks much experience, Bullock could make a difference moving forward.

“He’s a vet,” James said. “It’s great to have a shooter of his caliber, of his size; his competitive nature out on the floor. He was big for us.”

The Lakers left Staples Center two and a half games behind the Los Angeles Clippers for the final playoff spot in the West. But James expressed supreme confidence as the team prepared to visit the Pelicans on Saturday.

“I like where I’m at,” he said. “I will love where I’m at in the next few games, and I believe — continue to get better and better.”

As for his teammates — well, that is up to them.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

By Scott Cacciola

LOS ANGELES — Rajon Rondo has had a difficult time for the Lakers. He was suspended after brawling with the Houston Rockets in the second game of the season. He proceeded to mangle his right hand not just once, but twice, requiring surgery both times while missing a total of 31 games. And in recent weeks, he has been coming off the bench for Coach Luke Walton, even as Lonzo Ball, who had been starting at point guard, continues to recover from an ankle injury.

Rondo, a 13-year pro, was supposed to be an invaluable presence for the Lakers, who had otherwise surrounded LeBron James in Year 1 of the West Coast LeBron era with a cast of unproven (if promising) players and a hodgepodge of reclamation projects. Nobody thought this team would vie for a championship, but the road has been rougher than expected.

In the wake of a recent two-game road trip to New Orleans and Memphis that resulted in two deflating losses and the very real sense that the Lakers could miss the playoffs, Walton approached Rondo for a quiet conversation. Walton wanted to put him back in the starting lineup for Wednesday’s game against the Pelicans, and Rondo was on board with the plan.

After all, what did the Lakers have to lose? Aside from losing another game that they desperately needed to win.

“We sat there and talked,” Walton said. “He’s been fine with his role. He wants to play more — everyone wants to play more. But he hasn’t been complaining or anything like that. But our conversation was one of: ‘Let’s talk about what we need to do. How do we get back on track?’ It was an honest conversation. It was healthy and positive.”

As far as confidence-building exercises go, the Lakers’ subsequent 125-119 victory over the Pelicans was not necessarily Grade A material. The Pelicans have their own issues, and their star center Anthony Davis, who had hoped to be playing for the Lakers after this month’s trade deadline, was on a strict minutes limit as the Pelicans eye a summer sweepstakes for his services. (They would like to keep his limbs intact in the meantime.)

But Walton’s favorite verb after the game was “need,” as in the Lakers needed the win and needed some positive vibes.

Sure enough, Rondo helped a great deal, finishing with 16 assists, 11 points and 7 rebounds in 37 minutes.

“I’m very confident in what Rondo has done in this league,” Walton said. “He’s struggled a little bit, but some of that’s on me. His minutes have been down. We’ve been trying to find different groups to work. But he’s proven over his career that when he gets an opportunity, he shows up to play.”

Rondo was not particularly adept from the perimeter, shooting 5 of 15 from the field, and Davis feasted on the Lakers’ smaller lineup when he was on the court. Walton knows those could be more pressing issues against better teams. But for one night, the Lakers (30-31) allowed themselves to savor some hard-earned momentum — because it might not last.

The Lakers, who have been hindered this season by injuries and trade-deadline intrigue, are not a great basketball team. The question is whether they are merely mediocre, with a chance of still making the playoffs, or not very good at all, in which case they will have wasted their first year with James on the roster.

It hardly helps that the Lakers have one of the league’s most difficult schedules the rest of the way, starting Friday when they host the Milwaukee Bucks, who improved to 47-14 on Wednesday with a win against the Sacramento Kings. The Lakers’ coming schedule also includes meetings with playoff-bound teams like the Denver Nuggets and the Toronto Raptors.

“Every day is going to be its own challenge,” James said, adding: “Just try to stay positive throughout whatever’s going on.”

Rondo had experienced his own set of challenges ahead of Wednesday’s game. He was coming off a pair of dreadful performances during the team’s recent two-game trip, averaging 4.5 points and 2 assists off the bench while shooting 36.4 percent from the field. He was a nonfactor, or perhaps even a net negative.

“I didn’t have the rhythm on both ends of the floor,” Rondo said. “That’s why we have 82 games. You have the opportunity to play again and redeem yourself.”

At Wednesday’s shootaround, center Tyson Chandler kept yelling, “energy, energy, energy,” Rondo said. And during the game itself, the players focused on their body language — lots of hugs and high-fives — in addition to actually playing some defense for a change. Walton was also pleased that the Lakers had 37 assists to go with just eight turnovers.

“It’s a lot of fun when your guys are playing like that,” he said.

Forget that the Pelicans are struggling. Forget that James needed to sink a fadeaway 3-pointer from the corner with 31.3 seconds left to seal the win and sidestep disaster. Forget that Julius Randle, a center the Lakers let walk in free agency last summer, torched his old team for 35 points in the loss.

Forget all this until Friday, when Rondo and the rest of the Lakers are sure to face an even stiffer challenge.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Scott Cacciola

LOS ANGELES — LeBron James of the Los Angeles Lakers has shown throughout his 16-year N.B.A. career that he is good at a lot of basketball-related activities, including scoring, passing, rebounding and winning. But perhaps one of his most remarkable assets — a feat, really — is his durability. He seldom misses games because of injury.

But now, less than a week after turning 34, James is still on the mend from straining his left groin in a win over the Golden State Warriors on Christmas Day. The timetable for his return remains uncertain.

The Lakers announced on Friday, before playing the visiting Knicks, that James would not make a coming trip with the team for back-to-back games against the Minnesota Timberwolves on Sunday and the Dallas Mavericks on Monday. The Lakers’ next game after that is on Wednesday against the Detroit Pistons at Staples Center.

The team said in its statement that James was making “progress with his recovery” as he received daily treatment from the team’s medical staff and that he would be re-evaluated in one week.

Entering Friday, the Lakers had lost three of the four games they had played without James, dropping them to eighth place in the Western Conference standings with a 21-17 record — a precarious position for a team with playoff hopes. The Sacramento Kings were two games back in ninth place.

James’s absence has been compounded by the loss of Rajon Rondo, a veteran point guard who injured a ligament in his right ring finger against the Warriors and could miss three to four more weeks after undergoing surgery. Rondo had already missed 17 games this season because of a fractured bone in the same hand.

Their absences have meant an increased reliance on the team’s young core, which includes Brandon Ingram, Kyle Kuzma and Lonzo Ball. Those players have delivered at times, but not consistently enough to manufacture many wins.

As for James, he had been playing some of the finest basketball of his career, averaging 27.3 points, 8.3 rebounds and 7.1 assists while shooting 51.8 percent from the field and 35.6 percent from 3-point range. He appeared in each of the Lakers’ first 34 games and had not missed a game since April 12, 2017, back when he was employed by the Cleveland Cavaliers. That gave him a streak of 156 consecutive games played, including in the postseason.

“I take a lot of pride in it,” James said of his sturdiness after injuring his groin. “That’s why it pissed me off not to be able to go back into the game. It’s more than anything being available to my teammates, being available to my coaching staff. That’s something I take more personal than anything. Hopefully it’s not a long thing.”

The Lakers initially listed James as day-to-day after he underwent a magnetic resonance imaging exam. But Coach Luke Walton has said that the team will be cautious with James, who signed a four-year, $154 million deal in July.

For much of his career, James has been able to ward off the corrosive effects of his profession — the daily wear and tear, the punishment from defenders. If nothing else, the last couple of weeks have revealed him to be at least semi-mortal, after all — and the Lakers are taking no chances, hoping they can remain afloat until he returns.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Stein

DeMarcus Cousins is scheduled to make his long-anticipated debut with the Golden State Warriors during the team’s Los Angeles road trip later this month, according to two people with knowledge of the team’s plans.

The Warriors will play the Clippers on Jan. 18 and the Lakers on Jan. 21, with Cousins expected to make his return from a torn Achilles’ tendon he sustained in January 2018 in one of those two games, according to the people, who were not authorized to discuss the situation publicly.

After Golden State’s 122-95 rout of the Knicks on Tuesday night, Warriors Coach Steve Kerr would not make any promises but acknowledged that activating Cousins for either Jan. 18 or Jan. 21 is “definitely the range.”

“It’s not as simple as, ‘That’s the game’ — it’s somewhere in that neighborhood,” Kerr said. “Now that we are getting closer, like I told you guys yesterday, he’s made some big strides the last week or two, conditioning-wise.”

Cousins was in the midst of his best professional season with the New Orleans Pelicans last Jan. 26, when he tore his left Achilles late in a victory over the Houston Rockets.

The injury cost Cousins his first career trip to the playoffs after six and a half fruitless seasons with the Sacramento Kings and also led to him signing a one-year, $5.3 million contract with the Warriors in July. The All-Star center found his options limited in free agency amid concerns about how he would recover from such a severe setback.

The Warriors have been eager to see Cousins on the floor to finally address what has been one of the league’s most frequently asked questions since they signed him: How will Cousins find a niche in Golden State’s offense alongside four fellow All-Stars in Stephen Curry, Kevin Durant, Klay Thompson and Draymond Green?

“He’s a great basketball player in terms of just feel and things like that,” Curry told reporters Tuesday night. “There’s going to be some fun moments out there.

“I think with the collective IQ we have in our locker room and just understanding the unselfishness around what we do that we’ll be able to figure it out hopefully quickly. But it’s going to be an adjustment for sure.”

Despite a well-chronicled lack of size on its roster, Golden State has been cautious in bringing Cousins back from what has historically been one of the most unforgiving injuries for basketball players. The Warriors have never had the luxury of fielding an offensive-minded center during their run of three championships over the past four years, but the position has been even more problematic this season after the third-year big man Damian Jones, having been moved into an expanded role, suffered a season-ending shoulder injury. Jordan Bell, meanwhile, has struggled to establish a spot in Kerr’s rotation.

“It’s exciting,” Thompson said of Cousins’s coming debut. “I know our fan base is excited, the N.B.A. is excited. I can’t wait to integrate him into our team. He adds a whole new dimension, especially on the block. He’s such a handful down there and with his ability to playmake.”

When Cousins does finally make it onto the court, Golden State will become the first team since the Boston Celtics in 1975-76 to be able to put five All-Stars from the previous season on the court. The Celtics did it that season with a lineup of Jo Jo White, Charlie Scott, Dave Cowens, Paul Silas and John Havlicek.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Keeping Score

The Knicks rookie is blocking shots at a rate unseen since the days of Manute Bol. On a bad team, he’s a reason to keep watching.

By Benjamin Hoffman

Back in November, Mitchell Robinson showed the world what he’s capable of.

Robinson, the rookie Knicks center, absorbed contact under the basket from Orlando’s Melvin Frazier and flopped to the court, hoping for a foul that was never called. Instead, the Magic passed the ball around a few times, finding a wide-open Jerian Grant in the corner, 22 feet from a supine Robinson.

In three seconds that defied reasonable expectation, Robinson got to his feet, raced toward the corner and leapt into the air. He fully extended his lanky 7-foot-1 frame and swatted the 3-point attempt out of midair so matter-of-factly that Grant pulled his hands toward his body, looking almost sorry that he had attempted the shot.

The block was Robinson’s eighth of the game, setting a Knicks rookie record (which he stretched to nine blocks by the end of the night). But beyond the block’s impact in the moment, the play illustrated the 20-year-old’s approach to this season. The perception may be that the Knicks are tanking in hopes of drafting Duke’s Zion Williamson, but for Robinson, any shot an opponent takes is a chance for him to get a block — and he is not going to be cheated out of any of them, even if the shooter is beyond the 3-point line. As a result, a mostly irrelevant team has become must-watch television.

Last time we met the Magic @thegarden, @23savage____ set the Knicks rookie record for blocks ✋ Another block party tonight? 👀 pic.twitter.com/3RgRQoROec

The Knicks had not forgotten that November block when the Magic came back to Madison Square Garden on Tuesday. The team posted a video of the play on Twitter, wondering if history would repeat. The post proved prophetic, as Robinson led the way in a 108-103 victory for the Knicks with 17 points, 14 rebounds, 6 blocks and 3 steals in 33 minutes off the bench. Four of the blocks came in just 40 seconds in the second quarter.

“The kid is making history right now,” Knicks Coach David Fizdale said of Robinson after the win. “He’s putting himself in groups with historic names. Every single day he continues to grow and get better.”

The Knicks’ two-game winning streak ended on Thursday with a disappointing 125-118 loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers. But even in defeat, Robinson managed to add to his highlight reel, this time with a shot an opponent didn’t take. 

It was early in the second quarter, and Cavaliers guard Matthew Dellavedova got the ball with a clean look at the basket from 3-point range. As he prepared to shoot, he noticed Robinson a few feet in front of him, with the rookie lowering his shoulder slightly as he prepared to leap. Dellavedova immediately thought better of trying his luck and passed the ball instead. A few seconds later on the same possession, Robinson got his block anyway, swatting away a layup attempt from Marquese Chriss.

A rare prep-to-pro N.B.A. player as a result of his complicated withdrawal from Western Kentucky University, Robinson has been limited to 18.6 minutes a game as he works to refine his game, but he is still third in the N.B.A. at 2.3 blocks a game. When rated by block percentage, which estimates the percentage of an opponents’ shots a player blocks in his time on the floor, Robinson is nothing short of stunning, at 10.4 percent.

Basketball Reference has tracked block percentage back to the 1973-74 season, and the top-four seasons among players with 100 or more blocks belong to Manute Bol, the 7-foot-7 shot-blocking savant. No. 5 on the list belongs to Robinson. 

Sample size obviously needs to be considered, but Robinson stands a chance of being the only qualified player beyond Bol and Alonzo Mourning to finish a season with a block percentage higher than 10. Rim protection luminaries such as Serge Ibaka (9.8), Mark Eaton (9.2) and Dikembe Mutombo (8.8) all fell short of that mark in their best seasons. 

Robinson, who has quickly become a fan favorite, believes he is just getting started. He was asked recently how many shots he could block a game if the team let him play 30 minutes a night. “Probably around six,” he said. “I feel like I can get like six.”

The N.B.A. season record for blocks per game is 5.6, set by Eaton in 1984-85, yet Robinson’s boast does not seem all that far-fetched, largely because of his unusual ability to block shots along the perimeter as well as under the basket.

“His potential is crazy,” Emmanuel Mudiay, the Knicks guard, told reporters before Thursday’s game. “He’s probably the best shot-blocker I ever played with in my life. In my opinion, he’s the best shot-blocker in the league.”

Fizdale has said that Robinson’s confidence and execution have improved since the team acquired DeAndre Jordan to serve as his mentor. The numbers back that up, as Robinson has averaged 11 points, 8.7 rebounds and 3.2 blocks a game since Jordan’s arrival on Jan. 31, while still averaging only 23.1 minutes a night. He has also continued to pester outside shooters, with eight of his 35 blocks in February coming on 3-point attempts. 

Fizdale was asked recently if Robinson compared to any other players he had coached. The coach, who has worked with excellent rim protectors like Marc Gasol, Jermaine O’Neal and Chris Andersen, spoke about his rookie like a proud father.

“No,” he said. “He’s a different guy, and he’s got so much more room to grow. I’m going to keep my foot way up his butt to make sure he does.”

That could be terrible news for anyone looking to get a shot off against the Knicks in the coming years. They might find there is no place to hide.

Benjamin Hoffman is a senior staff editor and regular contributor to the Keeping Score column in sports. He joined The Times in 2005.  @BenHoffmanNYT • Facebook 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Tracy

Duke was given the No. 1 overall seed in the N.C.A.A. Division I men’s basketball tournament Sunday night, starting Coach Mike Krzyzewski and his star freshman Zion Williamson on a path to what they hope will be the Blue Devils’ sixth national title.

Duke (29-5) was one of three Atlantic Coast Conference teams to receive top seeds, joining Virginia (29-3) and North Carolina (27-6). It was the second time members of the same conference were named three of the four No. 1s; the Big East did so in 2009.

The fourth No. 1 seed was Gonzaga (30-3), the small stalwart from Spokane, Wash. While the Bulldogs lost the West Coast Conference title game to St. Mary’s last week, they already have a win over Duke on their résumé from a tournament in late November in Hawaii.

[Region previews: East | West | South | Midwest]

Of course, a top seed is no ticket to the Final Four in Minneapolis. Or even to the second round. Last year, for the first time in 136 such games, a No. 16 seed defeated a No. 1 when the University of Maryland-Baltimore County stunned Virginia.

The No. 2 seeds are Michigan State (28-6), Tennessee (29-5), Kentucky (27-6) and Michigan (28-6). The first of these edged the last of these in the Big Ten conference final minutes before the bracket was released. Yet it was the defeated Wolverines who received the privilege of placement in the West alongside Gonzaga, while the Spartans — who won all three games against their in-state rival this season — landed in Duke’s dreaded quadrant.

The Blue Devils finished the regular season on a 3-3 skid without Williamson, who sprained his knee when his shoe ripped open during a game on Feb. 20. But Williamson, the prospective No. 1 overall pick in the N.B.A. draft, returned last week, and Duke proceeded to stomp through the A.C.C. tournament. Williamson set the Duke scoring record for that event, with 81 points.

The selection committee effectively ignored the non-Williamson .500 squad and instead considered the team that has won every game except for a 2-point loss to Gonzaga and an overtime loss to Syracuse (20-13). It is Duke’s first No. 1 seed since 2015, which is also the last year it won the tournament.

“They earned their right to be there,” said the selection committee chairman, Bernard Muir, who is Stanford’s athletic director, when he appeared on CBS’s selection show to discuss the bracket.

The most challenging of the four regions appeared to be the South, topped by Virginia. If the Cavaliers get past 16-seeded Gardner-Webb (23-11) on Friday — a game they surely will not take for granted after last year — they could face a No. 8-seeded Mississippi (20-12) that has four wins over tournament teams. Then potential round of 16 opponents include Wisconsin (23-10), underseeded at No. 5, or fourth-seeded Kansas State (25-8), which came close to the Final Four last year.

The South final could well feature No. 2-seeded Tennessee (29-5) or No. 3-seeded Purdue (23-9). Both teams are ranked in the top 10 of KenPom.com’s efficiency ratings, a list Virginia sits atop. And either might have home-court advantage at Louisville’s KFC Yum Center.

EAST

SOUTH

Printable Version

Duke 85

1

Virginia 71

1

Duke 77

Virginia 63

COLUMBIA, S.C.

COLUMBIA, S.C.

North Dakota State 62

16

Duke 75

Virginia 53

Gardner-Webb 56

16

Virginia Commonwealth 58

8

Mississsippi 72

8

Oklahoma 51

Central

Florida 76

Virginia (32-3)

Duke (32-5)

Oklahoma 95

9

Central Florida 73

9

Mississippi State 76

5

Wisconsin 54

5

Oregon 73

Liberty 58

SAN JOSE, CALIF.

SAN JOSE, CALIF.

Oregon 72

12

Liberty 80

12

Virginia Tech 73

Oregon 49

Virginia Tech 66

4

Kansas State 64

4

U.C. Irvine 54

Virginia Tech 67

Saturday

8:49 p.m. (TBS)

Louisville, Ky.

Sunday

5:50 p.m. (CBS)

Washington, D.C.

U.C. Irvine 70

13

St. Louis 52

13

Villanova 61

6

Maryland 79

6

JACKSONVILLE, FLA.

Villanova 61

Maryland 67

HARTFORD

Louisiana State 63

St. Mary’s 57

11

Purdue 99 (OT)

Belmont 77

11

Louisiana State 79

3

Purdue 61

3

Louisiana

State 69

Purdue 87

Old Dominion 48

14

Yale 74

14

Louisville 76

7

Purdue (26-9)

Cincinnati 72

7

Michigan State (31-6)

Minnesota 50

COLUMBUS, OHIO

Iowa 77

DES MOINES

Iowa 79

10

Minnesota 86

10

Michigan State 76

2

Tennessee 77

2

Michigan State 80

Tennessee 94

FINAL

SEMIFINAL

SEMIFINAL

Michigan State 70

Tennessee 83 (OT)

April 8

Minneapolis

April 6

Minneapolis

April 6

Minneapolis

Colgate 70

15

Bradley 65

15

MIDWEST

WEST

Gonzaga 87

1

North Carolina 88

1

COLUMBUS, OHIO

Gonzaga 83

North Carolina 81

SALT LAKE CITY

North Carolina 80

Gonzaga 72

Iona 73

16

Fairleigh Dickinson 49

16

Utah State 61

8

Syracuse 69

8

Baylor 71

Washington 59

Auburn (29-9)

Gonzaga (33-3)

Baylor 78

9

Washington 78

9

Murray

State 62

Marquette 64

5

Auburn 78

5

Auburn 89

SALT LAKE CITY

HARTFORD

Murray State 83

12

New Mexico State 77

12

Florida State 76

4

Florida State 48

Auburn 97

Kansas 87

4

Florida State 90

Kansas 75

Saturday

6:09 p.m. (TBS)

 Anaheim, Calif.

Sunday

2:20 p.m. (CBS)

Kansas City, Mo.

Vermont 69

13

Northeastern 53

13

Buffalo 91

6

Iowa State 59

6

Buffalo 58

Ohio State 59

TULSA, OKLA.

TULSA, OKLA.

Arizona State 74

11

Texas Tech 63

Houston 58

Ohio State 62

11

Texas Tech 72

3

Houston 84

3

Texas Tech 78

Houston 74

Northern Kentucky 57

14

Georgia State 55

14

JACKSONVILLE, FLA.

Wofford 84

7

Nevada 61

7

Texas Tech (29-6)

Kentucky (30-6)

Wofford 56

Florida 49

DES MOINES

All times Eastern.

Seton Hall 68

10

Florida 70

10

Kentucky 79

2

Michigan 74

2

Kentucky 62

Michigan 44

Michigan 64

Kentucky 62

Abilene Christian 44

15

Montana 55

15

EAST

SOUTH

Printable Version

1

Duke 85

1

Virginia 71

Duke 77

Virginia 63

COLUMBIA, S.C.

COLUMBIA, S.C.

16

North Dakota State 62

Duke 75

Virginia 53

16

Gardner-Webb 56

8

Virginia Commonwealth 58

8

Mississsippi 72

Central 

Florida 76

Oklahoma 51

Duke (32-5)

Virginia (32-3)

9

Oklahoma 95

9

Central Florida 73

5

Mississippi State 76

5

Wisconsin 54

Liberty 58

SAN JOSE, CALIF.

SAN JOSE, CALIF.

Oregon 73

12

Oregon 72

12

Liberty 80

Oregon 49

Virginia Tech 73

4

Virginia Tech 66

4

Kansas State 64

U.C. Irvine 54

Saturday

8:49 p.m. (TBS)

Louisville, Ky.

Virginia Tech 67

Sunday

5:50 p.m. (CBS)

Washington, D.C.

13

U.C. Irvine 70

13

St. Louis 52

6

Villanova 61

6

Maryland 79

JACKSONVILLE, FLA.

Villanova 61

Maryland 67

HARTFORD

Louisiana State 63

Purdue 99 (OT)

11

St. Mary’s 57

11

Belmont 77

3

Louisiana State 79

3

Purdue 61

Louisiana 

State 69

Purdue 87

14

Old Dominion 48

14

Yale 74

7

Louisville 76

Purdue (25-9)

7

Cincinnati 72

Michigan State (31-6)

COLUMBUS, OHIO

Iowa 77

Minnesota 50

DES MOINES

10

Iowa 79

10

Minnesota 86

2

Michigan State 76

2

Tennessee 77

Tennessee 94

Michigan State 80

FINAL

SEMIFINAL

SEMIFINAL

Tennessee 83 (OT)

Michigan State 70

April 8

Minneapolis

April 6

Minneapolis

April 6

Minneapolis

15

Colgate 70

15

Bradley 65

MIDWEST

WEST

1

Gonzaga 87

1

North Carolina 88

COLUMBUS, OHIO

Gonzaga 83

North Carolina 81

SALT LAKE CITY

Gonzaga 72

North Carolina 80

16

16

Iona 73

Fairleigh Dickinson 49

8

8

Utah State 61

Syracuse 69

Baylor 71

Washington 59

Gonzaga (33-3)

Auburn (29-9)

9

9

Baylor 78

Washington 78

Murray 

State 62

5

5

Marquette 64

Auburn 78

Auburn 89

SALT LAKE CITY

HARTFORD

12

Murray State 83

12

New Mexico State 77

Florida State 48

4

Florida State 76

4

Kansas 87

Auburn 97

Florida State 90

Saturday

6:09 p,m. (TBS)

 Anaheim, Calif.

Sunday

2;20 p.m. (CBS)

Kansas City, Mo.

Kansas 75

13

Vermont 69

13

Northeastern 53

6

Buffalo 91

6

Iowa State 59

Buffalo 59

Ohio State 59

TULSA, OKLA.

TULSA, OKLA.

Friday, second game (TBS)*

11

Arizona State 74

Houston 58

11

Ohio State 62

Texas Tech 63

3

Texas Tech 72

3

Houston 84

Texas Tech 78

Houston 74

14

Northern Kentucky 57

14

Georgia State 55

JACKSONVILLE, FLA.

7

Wofford 84

Texas Tech (29-6)

7

Nevada 61

Kentucky (30-6)

Wofford 56

Florida 49

DES MOINES

All times Eastern.

10

Seton Hall 68

10

Florida 70

2

2

Kentucky 79

Michigan 74

Michigan 44

Kentucky 62

Michigan 64

Kentucky 62

15

Abilene Christian 44

15

Montana 55

Printable Version

By The New York Times

The region also features two prominent conference champions: sixth-seeded Villanova (25-9), the current Big East and defending national champion, and seventh-seeded Cincinnati (28-6), which won the American Athletic Conference tournament on Sunday.

In addition to Michigan State, the land mines in the East between Duke and the Final Four could include fourth-seeded Virginia Tech (24-8), which defeated the Williamson-less Blue Devils last month, and third-seeded Louisiana State (26-6), a talented squad that is without Coach Will Wade. He was suspended after a report emerged that he had discussed making an offer to a recruit on a phone call with an aspiring agent convicted of fraud in college recruiting.

The East has other ties to scandal. Seventh-seeded Louisville (20-13) faces 10th-seeded Minnesota (21-13) in the first round, a game that might have been a father-son matchup between Rick and Richard Pitino had the former not been let go as Louisville’s coach in 2017 shortly after corruption allegations became public. And L.S.U.’s first game is against No. 14 Yale (21-7), the Ivy League co-champion, whose women’s soccer program was caught up in the admissions scandal that federal prosecutors revealed last week.

In the national semifinals, the East winner, which will be determined in Washington, will face the West winner. In addition to Gonzaga and Michigan, contenders in that region include third-seeded Texas Tech (26-6), which was considered the best team in the strong Big 12 but was upset in the conference tournament by West Virginia (14-20); and fourth-seeded Florida State (27-7), which looked every bit Duke’s equal in the first half of the A.C.C. title game on Saturday. The West also features two mid-major darlings: No. 6 Buffalo (31-3) and No. 7 Nevada (29-4). The West Regional is in Anaheim, Calif.

North Carolina and Kentucky are fish out of water in the Midwest region, particularly given its setting. In the region semifinals, the Tar Heels could meet fourth-seeded Kansas (25-9), making its record-setting 30th straight N.C.A.A. tournament appearance, while the Wildcats might face sixth-seeded Iowa State (23-11). Those games will take place at Sprint Center in Kansas City, Mo. — a second home for the Jayhawks and Iowa State, who have combined to win the last seven Big 12 tournaments there.

The Midwest also features fifth-seeded Auburn (25-9), the surprise Southeastern Conference winner Sunday. Tigers Coach Bruce Pearl, hired in 2014, was effectively barred from N.C.A.A. coaching for three years for recruiting violations at Tennessee. Chuck Person, a former Auburn assistant, was charged with bribery and fraud in the recruiting cases, and last Friday, prosecutors said in a court filing that Person was expected to plead guilty on Tuesday.

The Big Ten led all conferences with eight teams in the tournament, while the Pacific-12 had only three. That number was actually larger than expected a week ago: Arizona State was given one of the last four at-large bids, and Oregon (23-13) surprised Washington (26-8) in the tournament final Saturday night to elbow its way into the field.

The Ducks were one of several unlikely receivers of automatic spots who effectively constricted the pool of 36 at-large bids. In another example, St. Louis (23-12) won the Atlantic 10 tournament Sunday, granting the Billikens a slot alongside Virginia Commonwealth (25-7), which effectively took an at-large bid away from a bubble team by failing to win its conference tournament.

This was the first year in decades that the N.C.A.A. did not use the much-maligned Rating Percentage Index, instead favoring the new N.C.A.A. Evaluation Tool. But the tournament field included 11th-seeded Arizona State (22-10) in its “last four in” despite the Sun Devils’ poor NET, while North Carolina State (22-11), a good-NET, bad-R.P.I. squad, was not even among the “first four out.”

But aficionados will be pleased that Belmont (26-5) of the Ohio Valley earned an at-large bid; the Bruins will play Temple in the play-in game on Tuesday.

“They made the most of the opportunities they had,” Muir said. “We just thought they were a phenomenal basketball team, very high on the offensive front — great offensive efficiency.”

St. John’s (21-12) was the last team in; the Red Storm will face Arizona State in an opening game on Wednesday.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Pro Basketball

The rare N.B.A. star willing to lean into his role as a villain, Butler, briefly back in the city he scorned, is ready to absorb fans’ anger.

By Marc Stein

Jimmy Butler knows what’s coming on Saturday night in Minneapolis. He understands, relishes and even encourages the looming prospect of the chilliest welcome any visiting N.B.A. player is bound to receive this season.

“They’re going to boo me,” Butler said of the Minnesota fans who watched him force his way out of town via a trade to the Philadelphia 76ers in November — months after Butler led the woebegone Timberwolves to their first playoff berth in 14 seasons.

“I would boo me, too. I’m not going to lie to you.”

Now a key member of what is widely regarded as the most potent starting lineup on the N.B.A. map outside of Golden State, Butler will be back at Target Center for the first time since the trade turmoil that captivated the league for the first two months of the season.

Butler insisted he was unfazed by what awaited him, and went on to suggest that a number of his Philadelphia colleagues, as well as some longtime friends who plan to be in attendance, will partake in the inevitable hostilities.

“I might actually join in on the boos,” Butler said.

Those who have spent any time around the rugged swingman surely don’t doubt it. At a time when N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver openly frets about player happiness — and when standouts such as Boston’s Kyrie Irving and Golden State’s Kevin Durant routinely rail against the approach of some of the news media — Butler is the rare star who savors the game’s edgy side and has embraced his portrayal as a villain.

“I love it,” Butler said in a phone interview, repeating the phrase three times — including once with a profanity for emphasis. “Who wants to be loved all the time?

“It’s O.K. It’s fine. I don’t need everybody to like me. I know who I am. I can’t say that enough. I know what I’m about. I know where my heart is. People will say, ‘He’s this way, or he’s that way,’ but nobody knows except for the people around me every day. Ask them and they’ll tell you differently.”

Elton Brand, the 76ers’ general manager, certainly falls within that category, describing Butler as “a caring person” who has quickly endeared himself “not only to his teammates but to our whole business operations staff and in the community.”

As a first-year general manager, Brand had his own reservations before going through with the first major move of his tenure, having watched chaos engulf the Timberwolves from afar — with no shortage of the noise coming from Butler himself after news leaked of the mid-September trade request he made in private.

But when Brand did his research, consulting former coaches and executives who had worked with Butler, along with former players he knew well who had firsthand knowledge, such as Nazr Mohammed and Mike Dunleavy Jr., he received little in the way of dissenting feedback.

“Even with the story that was reported, that wasn’t a big deal,” Brand said, referring to an ESPN report in January that asserted Butler “aggressively challenged” Philadelphia Coach Brett Brown. “He didn’t curse. He wasn’t loud. It was his reputation following him.”

Butler, 29, admitted in a recent interview with Yahoo Sports’s Chris Haynes that he is a “confrontational” teammate, but that he is also trying to be more selective in showing his blunt nature as he gets older. It should be noted that, as Brand found, Butler has also been a largely popular teammate in his stints with the Chicago Bulls and Team U.S.A. — and, frankly, with numerous Timberwolves apart from the All-Star center Karl-Anthony Towns.

Butler took a hit in some precincts after informing the since-fired coach with whom he’s so closely associated — Tom Thibodeau — that he was no longer interested in trying to nurture Towns and Andrew Wiggins and wanted out of Minnesota. One example of the damage: Butler is one of the top 12 players in the Eastern Conference, but East coaches snubbed him as a reserve for the All-Star Game in February.

Yet Butler plays on, insisting he would “do nothing over” in Minnesota and reveling in the knowledge that for the first time in his career, he’s on a team capable of getting to the N.B.A. finals.

“I will tell you that we’ve got a lot of talent,” Butler said.

The Sixers haven’t established the required consistency to earn the label of East favorites, going 11-6 since the All-Star break with middling placement in both offensive (18th) and defensive (12th) efficiency in that span. Butler, though, is doing what he can to make it work, sacrificing in a manner that would seem to invalidate some of the criticism.

Philadelphia followed its trade for Butler on Nov. 12 by acquiring Tobias Harris from the Los Angeles Clippers on Feb. 6, giving Brown two All-Star-caliber players to team with the dynamic duo of Joel Embiid and Ben Simmons and the shooter extraordinaire J.J. Redick. In the first 20 games since, when those five players share the floor, Butler has scaled back more than anyone, taking fewer shots (46) than the other four — with Embiid by far in the lead (95 shots).

Of course, in fourth quarters, Butler has emerged as the most reliable offensive option of the quintet, shooting 12 for 18 when all five play together, highlighted by last week’s game-winning jumper against Boston after the Celtics had won six of the teams’ seven previous meetings. The natural drop in Butler’s per-game averages this season, playing for such a loaded team, tends to overshadow the fact that he still ranks 16th in the league in a category (Real Plus-Minus) strongly associated with team success.

“He’s a special talent at closing and winning games — and not just offensively,” Brand said. “He’s just a winner.”

An indication of Butler’s true standing in the game will come July 1, when he becomes an unrestricted free agent for the first time. Brand has said repeatedly that he hopes to keep Philadelphia’s new core four together, but Butler is expected to attract serious interest from both Los Angeles teams as well as the Nets. The Clippers’ special adviser Jerry West, to name one prominent fan, is said to be a longtime admirer of Butler’s two-way impact.

Not that Butler is prepared to discuss much about the future. He brushed off free-agency talk in our conversation and claimed that he didn’t even know Minnesota was on this week’s calendar until I told him.

He stuck mostly to peripheral subjects. Those include Butler’s devotion to playing dominoes and Uno, his friendship with “the best soccer player in the world” — Paris St.-Germain’s Brazilian star Neymar — and the trusty American football he travels around with. Butler said he plans to toss the football with other 76ers with greater regularity during the playoffs.

“I’m telling you — it takes away some of that pressure,” Butler said.

Thibodeau still lives in Minneapolis in the wake of his Jan. 6 firing, but politely declined to comment about Butler’s visit. Butler, for his part, continues to refer to Thibodeau as “my guy.” He said they maintained regular contact.

Although Butler remains unwilling to dig deeply into the reasons he pushed so hard for an exit so soon after the dramatic impact he had in his lone full season with the Wolves, give him this: He is prepared to take whatever pent-up frustration has been stored up for him in the Twin Cities.

Rather than ask for forgiveness from the locals, or even civility, Butler said: “I did what I did. I’m cool with it. I’m in a good place.”

He has only one request for the basketball public: Pick someone else to win the East besides the up-and-down Sixers.

“Don’t pick us,” Butler said. “I hope people say we’re going to lose in the first round. I don’t want anybody to think we’re that good because I think it makes us play a little bit harder.”

Marc Stein is a sports reporter specializing in N.B.A. coverage, with occasional forays into soccer and tennis. He spent nearly 15 years at ESPN before coming to The Times.  @TheSteinLine • Facebook 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Victor Mather

Jim Boeheim, the longtime men’s basketball coach at Syracuse, struck and killed a pedestrian on Wednesday night, the police said.

A man had been involved in an earlier accident and had left his car on I-690 near Syracuse. Boeheim drove by later, striking the man, the police said.

The victim was Jorge Jimenez, 51, of Syracuse. A police statement said Boeheim had tried to avoid the disabled car in the middle of the road and as a result had “struck the victim who was standing on the side of the road.”

A police statement said that neither driver was impaired by drugs or alcohol. It said Boeheim’s speed had not been determined. While no tickets had been issued, an investigation was being conducted, it said.

The area was under a weather advisory for snow and ice conditions.

“I am heartbroken that a member of our community died as the result of last night’s accident,” Boeheim said in a statement. “Juli and I extend our deepest sympathies to the Jimenez family. Out of respect for those involved, I will not be providing further comment at this time.”

“We are saddened by the death of a member of our Central New York community,” said John Wildhack, the Syracuse athletic director. “Coach Boeheim is in contact with local authorities and cooperating fully.”

Boeheim, 74, has been the coach at Syracuse since 1976, winning a national championship in 2003 and logging four other Final Four appearances over the years.

Earlier in the evening, Syracuse (18-8) had beaten No. 18 Louisville, 69-49.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Stein

[Want to read more from Marc Stein? Sign up for his free, weekly N.B.A. newsletter by clicking here.]

Four of the six best records in the N.B.A. belonged to Eastern Conference teams through Saturday night’s play.

The Golden State Warriors, meanwhile, reached the 41-game midpoint of the schedule on a pedestrian (for them) 54-win pace.

The first half of the regular season, in other words, has defied most preseason prognostications and requires special examination to properly sort out the 1-to-30 landscape. So it is an ideal time to reconvene what is known as the Committee (of One) and share my team-by-team progress report in the form of N.B.A. Power Rankings.

The Committee, as it has since the 2002-03 season, determines the order by weighing what is happening in the present alongside each team’s big-picture outlook — with sprinkles of subjectivity and whimsy thrown in.

What used to be a weekly endeavor for me is only a once-a-season enterprise every January now. Yet the goal, as always, is to provide a more up-to-date and detailed assessment than the standings do.

(Records and statistics are current heading into Sunday’s games.)

1. Toronto Raptors (32-12)

The Raptors were this season’s first 30-win team, which is impressive when Kawhi Leonard and Kyle Lowry have been in uniform together only three times in Toronto’s last 17 games. The threat of the Los Angeles Clippers signing Leonard away in free agency is all too real for every basketball-loving Canadian, but the Raptors may still assemble the best possible sales pitch: Win the post-LeBron James Eastern Conference to get to the N.B.A. finals and give Leonard ample reason to stay.

2. Milwaukee Bucks (29-12)

Giannis Antetokounmpo supplanting James Harden as the league’s Most Valuable Player? Mike Budenholzer emerging from the usual deep field to win N.B.A. Coach of the Year? Milwaukee clinching the East’s No. 1 seed heading into the playoffs? Any of those would have been fairly wild claims back in September, but suddenly they all seem possible halfway through the regular-season schedule. The challenge now: Milwaukee is just beginning the toughest two months of its schedule.

3. Golden State Warriors (28-14) Maybe the Warriors do not inspire the fear they once did. Maybe their defensive woes (having slipped to 16th in defensive efficiency) are a sign of true vulnerability. Or maybe, with DeMarcus Cousins just days away from making his long-awaited debut, Golden State’s season is about to start for real. I tend to believe it is the latter, in Year 5 of a historic run, having seen firsthand how much this team can struggle with regular-season motivation.

[Read: DeMarcus Cousins Eyes Return as Warriors Prepare for 5-All-Star Lineup]

4. Denver Nuggets (28-13)

The regular season is just under 90 days old. The plucky Nuggets, despite numerous injuries, have held the top spot in the West — Golden State’s conference — for 44 of them. Yet you would not know it given the limited attention these guys get, as N.B.A. know-it-alls wrestle with billing Denver as a full-fledged contender — or dismissing them as a team that can only do pre-April damage. Book this either way: Nikola Jokic is a lock to snag his first All-Star berth.

5. Oklahoma City (26-16)

Remember the Thunder’s 0-4 start? Neither do we. Despite the season-long absence of the ace defender Andre Roberson, Oklahoma City leads the league in defensive rating (allowing just 102.9 points per 100 possessions) and specializes in the physical style that has troubled Golden State in the past. The Thunder have undoubtedly benefited from what ranks as the league’s second-easiest schedule to date, but you would struggle to find a star duo meshing better than Russell Westbrook and Paul George.

6. Houston Rockets (24-17)

Earlier this season, I responded to the Rockets’ disappointing start and Chris Paul’s ongoing hamstring issues by stopping just short of proclaiming the window to contention closed for James Harden and Co. Houston is 7-2 since Dec. 24 — with Harden averaging a mere 41.0 points (and 16.7 3-point attempts!) per game in that stretch. Write the Rockets off if you wish, but Harden’s brilliance, augmented by a resurgent Clint Capela and the newcomer Austin Rivers, should give you pause.

7. Indiana Pacers (28-14)

Surprise No. 1: Only six teams in the league, according to Basketball-Reference.com’s projections, will finish the season with at least 50 wins. Surprise No. 2: Indiana is on that list, ahead of higher-profile teams like Philadelphia and Oklahoma City, despite the fact that the All-Star guard Victor Oladipo has missed 11 games with a knee problem. Coach Nate McMillan, continuity and a top-two defense have the unfashionable Pacers overachieving — again.

8. San Antonio Spurs (25-19)

This season’s 11-14 start marked the first time Gregg Popovich has ever sported a sub-.500 record after 25 games and included a four-game stretch in which the Spurs unfathomably suffered three losses in excess of 30 points. The ensuing turnaround, though, has been no less remarkable. San Antonio is 14-5 and ranks No. 1 in offensive efficiency and No. 2 in defensive efficiency in that span, led by the midrange maestros DeMar DeRozan and LaMarcus Aldridge flat-out ignoring the league’s 3-point revolution.

9. Boston Celtics (25-17)

The numbers continue to say that the Celtics are fine. They have a per-game average point differential (+6.4) that ranks second only to Milwaukee’s (+9.1). Boston is also one of just four teams (along with Milwaukee, Toronto and Denver) to rank in the top 10 in both offensive (ninth) and defensive (fourth) efficiency. The problem: Boston just followed up an impressive rout of Indiana with losses in Miami and Orlando that suggested yet again that things are not fine.

10. Philadelphia 76ers (27-16)

For all the creative tension that has bubbled around the Sixers since they acquired Jimmy Butler on Nov. 10, they have the fourth-best overall record in that span (19-10) despite well-chronicled concerns about shooting and depth around Philadelphia’s star trio as well as the occasional squawking. Butler’s fit alongside Joel Embiid and Ben Simmons has been less than seamless, as predicted, but stockpiling as much talent as possible and then trying to solve the puzzle is the N.B.A. way.

11. Utah Jazz (23-21)

The Jazz have risen to a more familiar No. 5 in defensive efficiency and contend that their road-heavy schedule, with 25 of the first 41 games away, has contributed mightily to keeping them out of the West’s top eight for much of the season. But to resemble the team most experts thought it would be, Utah needs Donovan Mitchell’s January resurgence to last, as well as a return to last season’s standards from Joe Ingles.

12. Portland Trail Blazers (26-17)

One of my faulty predictions from last year asserted that 2018 would be the year that the Trail Blazers finally broke up the Damian Lillard/C.J. McCollum partnership as a means to build a more balanced roster. Portland has instead clung to the hope that Jusuf Nurkic will keep inching closer to becoming the consistent third wheel it has needed for ages. It is a better team than last season’s version but only marginally — and still vulnerable to athletic opposition.

13. Los Angeles Lakers (23-20)

Winning without LeBron James is hard. Who knew? The Lakers are 3-6 since James suffered a strained groin in a Christmas Day rout of Golden State. As a result, they have slid from a higher-than-expected No. 4 to an uncomfortable No. 8 in the West — thus resurrecting all the preseason questions about L.A.’s ability to make the playoffs with, shall we say, such an eclectic roster. James appears likely, at 34, to miss more than the 11 games Stephen Curry lost to a similar injury in November.

14. Los Angeles Clippers (24-18)

I fear they are at high risk to slip out of the West’s top eight, but the Clippers would certainly slot in right at the top of the play-hard rankings if there were such an industry. The feisty likes of Montrezl Harrell and Patrick Beverley, flanking a better-than-ever Tobias Harris, continue to make the Clippers more bizarrely competitive than anyone imagined heading into a summer in which they appear well positioned to make the loudest free-agent noise in franchise history.

15. Sacramento Kings (22-21)

A Bogdan Bogdanovic buzzer-beater to topple the Lakers on Dec. 27 hiked the fast-paced Kings’ record to 19-16 and seemed to announce the blossoming tandem of De’Aaron Fox and Buddy Hield as certifiable playoff material after a league-high 12 consecutive seasons of missing out. Sacramento then unraveled, enduring a 1-5 funk which included an embarrassing fall-from-ahead loss at Phoenix when the Suns were without Devin Booker. You cannot afford funks in the West.

16. Miami Heat (21-20)

Little emanating from South Beach makes sense, whether it is Miami’s ability to play .500 basketball despite missing out on Butler via trade and having Goran Dragic healthy for just 14 games — or the fact this team is 0-3 against Atlanta. It is unclear how long it will take Miami to get back into the trade mix for a player of Butler’s caliber, but the retiring Dwyane Wade should have an opportunity to bid the game farewell from the playoff stage.

17. Brooklyn Nets (21-23)

The drop-off from the East’s top five to teams trying to secure the last three playoff stops is as steep as pessimists feared. Not that the Nets intend to apologize after the barren half-decade they endured in the wake of their disastrous 2014 trade with Boston. While the Knicks tank their way to a shot at Zion Williamson, New Yorkers may get postseason games after all, thanks to success stories like Spencer Dinwiddie, D’Angelo Russell, Joe Harris and Jarrett Allen.

18. New Orleans Pelicans (20-23)

It is a misnomer to say Anthony Davis has no help; Jrue Holiday, Nikola Mirotic and Julius Randle are all accomplished players. The Pelicans’ problems have been health (most notably injuries for Mirotic and the point guard Elfrid Payton) and difficulties in playing Davis, Mirotic and Randle together even when they are all available. New Orleans, as a result, is facing the biggest possible issue: Scenarios that force them to trade The Brow grow more plausible by the day.

19. Washington Wizards (18-25)

Indiana has crashed the East’s upper crust to give the conference its own Fab Five, but we were not exaggerating the drop-off to the chasing pack. Look no further than the nation’s capital for proof, with the Wizards still firmly in the playoff chase despite losing John Wall to season-ending heel surgery. Recent wins over Oklahoma City, Philadelphia and Milwaukee should tell you that the Wiz are not heeding some fans’ calls to tank.

20. Dallas Mavericks (20-22)

Luka Doncic has a real shot to become the first rookie to achieve All-Star status since Blake Griffin in 2011, which already makes this a more successful season in Dallas than many forecast. But the huge disparity between the Mavericks’ play at home (16-4) and on the road (4-18), Dirk Nowitzki’s health woes in what they hoped would be a heartwarming final season and J.J. Barea’s season-ending Achilles tear, have combined to snuff out some of the joy.

[Read: The Mavericks’ Key to Keeping Players Fresh? Blood Samples]

21. Minnesota Timberwolves (21-22) As regular readers know, Glen Taylor’s passive ownership style is a frequent source of consternation for the Committee. But give Taylor this: Firing Tom Thibodeau when he did to replace him with the 32-year-old Ryan Saunders, bizarre as the timing seemed, meant eating an estimated $20 million left on Thibodeau’s contract. If only Taylor was that decisive back in June or July when the Wolves really needed to start dealing with Butler’s discontent.

22. Charlotte Hornets (19-23)

The Michael Jordan-owned Hornets have All-Star Weekend hosting duties in a month to assure the franchise and city a measure of prominence this season. But what they, especially Jordan, really want is a playoff berth that is by no means certain given the limited scoring punch Charlotte can field beyond its do-everything guard Kemba Walker. It also does not help that the Hornets have already racked up a league-high eight costly losses in one-possession games.

23. Detroit Pistons (18-23)

Since it hit my radar during an early season visit to Motown, it has been one of my favorite stats of the season: Blake Griffin leads the league in touches per game at 93.3. Nikola Jokic and Harden are the only others in 90s, but the number doubles as an illustration of the Pistons’ shortcomings as much as it spotlights Griffin’s special ability as a power player to handle the ball like a guard. He is clearly compensating for multiple holes in the roster.

24. Memphis Grizzlies (19-23)

Memphis has nose-dived from a West-leading record of 12-5 on Thanksgiving, losing 18 of 25 games while the former All-Star center Marc Gasol has been submerged in a slump that has shown few signs of relenting. The fade may not only cost the Grizzlies a playoff berth but also threaten to extend Mike Conley’s career-long wait for an All-Star berth, since team success is bound to be factored in to the votes of the media panel and coaches given the glut of worthy guards in the West.

25. Orlando Magic (18-24)

The Magic reeled off seven wins in a nine-game stretch in November under new coach Steve Clifford to spawn hopes that competing for a spot in the inviting lower reaches of the East’s playoff ladder was feasible. Two months later, apart from the career-best season assembled by the veteran big man Nikola Vucevic, Orlando is back on course for a ninth successive trip to the lottery and remains as desperate as Phoenix for an upgrade at point guard.

26. Atlanta Hawks (13-29)

If the Hawks finish where they are as the so-called best of the worst, they will have a 10.5 percent shot at the No. 1 overall pick in June in the N.B.A.’s new lottery system, which flattens out the odds to 14 percent each for teams with the three-worst records. In the interim, Trae Young’s development is the overwhelming focus, which makes it difficult not to partake in obsessing over how Young is shooting from the field (.394) and 3-point range (.291).

27. Phoenix Suns (11-33)

Deandre Ayton’s Rookie of the Year campaign would appear to be the only pleasant diversion for one of the league’s longest-suffering fan bases amid Phoenix’s ninth straight non-playoff season, Booker’s various health woes and the owner Robert Sarver’s struggles to secure public financing for the renovation of the Suns’ downtown arena. Yet I cannot say I love Ayton’s chances after witnessing up close how badly he was outplayed by the R.O.Y. favorite Doncic last week.

28. New York Knicks (10-32)

Will the Knicks really hold Kristaps Porzingis out for the entire season? Will the Knicks trade Enes Kanter? Will the Knicks get lucky in the June draft? Those three questions have dominated Coach David Fizdale’s first season in New York while this franchise waits for its opportunity in July to see if it can really make the long-awaited splash in free agency that many league observers legitimately expect after two mostly hapless decades.

29. Chicago Bulls (10-33)

Jim Boylen is still running some long practices, but things have mellowed (at least somewhat) between the Bulls and their feisty new coach after the initial wave of wind sprints, push-ups and disagreements. While Boylen works to secure a return next season, it is all about development for the rest of this season for the few keepers on the roster — most notably Lauri Markkanen, Zach LaVine and Wendell Carter Jr. — and finding new homes for Jabari Parker and Robin Lopez.

30. Cleveland Cavaliers (8-35)

In the four years between James’s two stints with his home-state franchise, Cleveland somehow won the N.B.A. draft lottery three times: 2011 (Kyrie Irving), 2013 (Anthony Bennett) and 2014 (Andrew Wiggins). Dreams of getting lucky again and earning the right to select Zion Williamson may be the only source of comfort for Cavaliers fans to get through what surely must feel like the longest of winters watching such hopeless basketball.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Scott Cacciola

LOS ANGELES — At the end of a disastrous season in which the Los Angeles Lakers failed to make the playoffs, despite having added LeBron James via free agency, Magic Johnson made the stunning announcement on Tuesday that he was stepping down as the team’s president of basketball operations.

Johnson delivered the news at an impromptu news conference before the Lakers’ regular-season finale, against the Portland Trail Blazers, and he said he had not yet informed Jeanie Buss, the team’s controlling owner. In fact, he had told nearly no one before he addressed a mass of hastily assembled reporters.

“I couldn’t face her to tell her,” he said, referring to Buss. He later added that he would find her at Staples Center to address her in person.

Earvin, I loved working side by side with you. You’ve brought us a long way. We will continue the journey. We love you 💜💛 https://t.co/ofmQl6BtBz

Later, the team released a statement, calling Johnson “not only a Lakers icon, but our family.”

[Magic Johnson’s biggest moments running the Lakers.]

“There is no greater Los Angeles Laker than Earvin Johnson,” the statement read, using Johnson’s formal name. “We are deeply grateful to Magic for all that he has done for our franchise — as a player, an ambassador and an executive.”

The statement continued, “As we begin the process of moving forward, we will work in a measured and methodical fashion to make the right moves for the future of our organization.”

“Measured” and “methodical” would be an about-face from the way Johnson stepped down. It was a surreal scene as he fielded questions for nearly 45 minutes after he made his announcement, appearing to hold back tears at times, and repeatedly said that he loved Buss like a sister. He then posed for pictures with team employees, former teammates and a local news anchor.

“I want to go back to having fun,” Johnson, 59, said. “I want to go back to being who I was before taking on this job, and we’re halfway there with LeBron coming. I think this summer, with that other star coming in — whoever’s going to come in — I think this team is going to be in position to really contend for a championship with the growth of the other young players.”

Johnson was named to the post in February 2017 and said at the time that it was “a dream come true.” But on Tuesday he said that he wanted to get back to being a mentor and a businessman, and that he had felt limited in his ability to do those things in his current role.

For example, he said he was upset that he could not attend Dwyane Wade’s final game for the Miami Heat on Tuesday night — or congratulate Russell Westbrook of the Oklahoma City Thunder on Twitter for finishing the regular season averaging another triple-double. (Johnson said the league would have considered it “tampering.”)

Johnson also said that he had received a phone call last week from the tennis star Serena Williams, asking if he would be an adviser to her.

“When Serena called me, wow, that’s who I am,” Johnson said. “I love helping people.”

He added: “I like to be free. And then I got a great life outside of this. What am I doing? I got a beautiful life, so I’m going to go back to that beautiful life, and I’m looking forward to it.”

But there is palace intrigue at play, too — these are the Lakers, after all — and Johnson strongly indicated that he had been leaning toward firing Coach Luke Walton. Buss, though, is known to think highly of Walton, a former Laker who has been the team’s coach for three seasons, and Johnson suggested that he did not want to go through with it.

“I would have to affect someone’s livelihood and their life,” Johnson said, “and I thought about that. That’s not fun for me. That’s not who I am, and then I don’t want to put her in the middle of us, even though she said, ‘Hey, do what you want to do.’ I know she has great love for him.”

The Lakers, who have been downtrodden in recent years, are still one of the most glamorous franchises in the league, and Johnson, who helped the Lakers win five championships as a Hall of Fame point guard, remains one of the organization’s most popular figures.

Johnson was hired to replace Jim Buss, the brother of Jeanie Buss. Johnson, who had previously been a partial owner of the team as well, worked alongside Rob Pelinka, a former agent, who was brought in as the team’s general manager. (Johnson said that he had not told Pelinka of his decision to step down, either.)

While Johnson had some memorable moments at the helm of the Lakers’ operation, the roster that he and Pelinka built around James was widely considered inadequate. After losing to Portland in their finale, the Lakers had a record of 37-45, which assured them of missing the playoffs for the sixth consecutive season. It is the first losing effort by a James-led team since the star forward’s rookie season in 2003-04, when his Cleveland Cavaliers went 35-47.

On Tuesday, Johnson preached patience.

“I’m excited about the direction,” he said before he headed out the door.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Keeping Score

James’s first season with the Lakers has been disappointing, but passing his idol in career scoring goes beyond winning and losing.

By Benjamin Hoffman

There was no Instagram post celebrating the achievement in advance this time. There was relatively little buildup from the news media. It was an event that might have dominated the news cycle in years’ past, but when LeBron James passed Michael Jordan on the N.B.A.’s career scoring list on Wednesday night, it was a triumph that somehow had been reduced to a footnote.

James came into the Los Angeles Lakers’ game against the Denver Nuggets needing 13 points to surpass Jordan for fourth place on the career list. With 5 minutes 38 seconds remaining in the second quarter, he managed to force his way to the basket for a layup, giving him 14 points for the game and 32,294 for his career. For good measure, he was fouled on the play. 

After a short stoppage to acknowledge the moment, play resumed as the Lakers, clinging to the last shreds of their playoff hopes, tried their best to overcome a huge early deficit at home against a heavily favored opponent.

LeBron passes Michael Jordan on all-time scoring list pic.twitter.com/G2tAovqMrz

The Lakers, led by an unlikely group of bench players, did make a run at Denver, reducing a 17-point deficit at halftime to 2 points with 8:37 left in the fourth quarter. But the Nuggets regained their footing and ran away with a 115-99 victory, spoiling a night in which James contributed 31 points, 7 rebounds and 7 assists, looking far more energized on both ends of the court than he had in recent weeks, and finishing the night with his career point total up to 32,311. 

James, who has taken the brunt of the criticism for the Lakers’ failings in a difficult first year in Los Angeles, had acknowledged the pending accomplishment in a tweet shortly before the game, but was measured when discussing it with reporters earlier in the day.

“I take all accomplishments as they come,” he said. “Any time I’m in the breath with any other greats — and obviously M.J. being the guy that I looked up to my whole life, the guy I admired as a kid — I think it’s going to be pretty cool.”

Jordan, who owns the Charlotte Hornets, issued a brief statement on Thursday, saying, “I want to congratulate LeBron on achieving another great milestone during his amazing career.” The statement was notable mostly for being far more succinct than the one he issued when Kobe Bryant passed him on the career scoring list in 2014.

One would hardly have guessed from either man’s words that the greatest current basketball player had just surpassed his idol in their sport’s signature statistic. The inability for James to truly celebrate the moment was yet another indignity in a season full of them.

It was a little more than a year ago when James had seemingly settled into a groove. He scored his 30,000th point — a feat he congratulated himself about on Instagram hours before he actually accomplished it. With that hurdle cleared, and with recent championship runs in Miami and Cleveland under his belt, his march toward challenging Jordan, then Bryant, then Karl Malone and maybe even Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, the N.B.A.’s career scoring leader, seemed as if it would come without the criticism that had followed him earlier in his career.

A decision — a loaded word when it comes to James — to move to an ill-prepared Lakers team in the off-season has changed the calculus altogether. The team was predicted by most to struggle to make the playoffs in the West thanks to its collection of too-young players and veterans who do not complement James. Nevertheless, many have labeled the year a disappointment by virtue of the team’s struggles despite having James, a player whose presence has seemingly guaranteed a finals appearance for close to a decade.

As a result, James and the people around him have not been able to take much joy in his accomplishments. Just last week he passed Andre Miller to move into 10th place in career assists, thus making him the only player currently in the top 10 in both career points and assists. That feat — it had been temporarily attained by only a handful of other players going back to the days of Bob Cousy — was met with a collective shrug.

It is a reality of James’s life that he acknowledged on Wednesday.

“I haven’t really appreciated anything I’ve been able to accomplish because I’m so engulfed in what’s next,” he said. “How I can continue to get better; how I can help this franchise get back to where it needs to be.”

An occasional season of missing the playoffs is not unusual for most players — even the great ones — but to capture how truly rare it would be for a James-led team, consider that he has played double-digit playoff games in each of the last 13 years. He has appeared in nine N.B.A. finals — winning three — and as a result his career rankings among playoff performers come off as outrageous, even for someone as accomplished as James. 

Those rankings almost certainly will not improve this year. But among the more interesting aspects of James’s current predicament is the opinion among many Lakers fans that the team’s struggles have resulted in James’s failing to live up to Bryant’s legacy. Those criticisms ignore the fact that the Lakers’ current six-year run of missing the playoffs included three seasons in which Bryant was still with the team. 

In fact, when Bryant passed Jordan on the career scoring list in 2014 — a feat considered a big enough deal at the time that a road game in Minnesota was stopped for several minutes so the crowd could give him a standing ovation and the Timberwolves’ owner could present him with the game ball — the Lakers were only 8-16 and, partially a result of a season-ending injury to Bryant later in the year, were on their way to a 21-61 record.

But in one of the endless parallels between the careers of Jordan and James, players who will be debated long after both are gone, Jordan, who passed Wilt Chamberlain for No. 3 on the career scoring list in 2003, also found little joy in what should have been a huge accomplishment, largely because his Washington Wizards were a .500 team at the time. 

“The thing about stats is they define you when you’re 10 or 20 years past the game,” Jordan said when asked to sum up his feelings on the accomplishment. “While you’re playing, what matters is wins.”

James, who wears No. 23 because of Jordan, put a wristband on his forearm because of Jordan, learned to shoot fadeaways because of Jordan and pitches sneakers for Nike just like Jordan does, may want to heed that advice from Jordan in terms of coming back on his accomplishments later, even if they have to be put aside for now. 

The Lakers could never win another game and James, a player who still refuses to label himself a scorer, will always have more points than Jordan, the player who served as his inspiration on a path to greatness. 

“I gotta carry it on to the next kid,” James said after the game, finally letting his emotion truly show. “Hopefully I can inspire the next kid like myself.”

An earlier version of this article misstated the time in the game when LeBron James moved to fourth on the N.B.A.'s career scoring list. It was with 5:38 left in the second quarter, not 5:38 into the second quarter.

Benjamin Hoffman is a senior staff editor and regular contributor to the Keeping Score column in sports. He joined The Times in 2005.  @BenHoffmanNYT • Facebook 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Scott Cacciola and Eric Schmitt

LOS ANGELES — Knicks center Enes Kanter said on Friday that he would not travel with the team to play the Washington Wizards in London on Jan. 17 because he feared retaliation for his public opposition to President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey.

Kanter, who is Turkish, has been an outspoken critic of the president for years.

“Sadly, I’m not going because of that freaking lunatic, the Turkish president,” Kanter said after the Knicks’ 119-112 victory over the Lakers. “It’s pretty sad that all the stuff affects my career and basketball because I want to be out there and help my team win. But just because of the one lunatic guy, one maniac, one dictator, I can’t even go out there and do my job. It’s pretty sad.”

Kanter said Turkish operatives could present a danger to him in London.

“They have a lot of spies there,” he said. “I could get killed there easy.”

An official at the Turkish Embassy in Washington, speaking Saturday on the condition of anonymity to abide by diplomatic protocol, dismissed Kanter’s comments as baseless.

A Knicks official later said that Kanter would not be traveling to London because of a visa issue.

In May 2017, Kanter was detained for several hours at an airport in Romania after the Turkish government canceled his travel documents. Later that year, Turkey’s state-run news agency reported that prosecutors were seeking more than four years in jail for Kanter on charges that he had insulted Erdogan on social media.

Scott Cacciola reported from Los Angeles, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

keeping score

Harden’s 57 points against Memphis accounted for more than half of his team’s total helping make up for his lack of a supporting cast.

By Benjamin Hoffman

No Chris Paul. No Eric Gordon. No Clint Capela. No problem. The Houston Rockets still have James Harden.

In a mind-boggling performance, Harden and his supporting cast — if you can call it that — managed to beat the Memphis Grizzlies by 112-94 at Houston’s Toyota Center, with Harden scoring 57 points in 34 minutes.

It was the 17th game in a row in which Harden scored at least 30 points — a feat previously accomplished in a single season by only Wilt Chamberlain — and it was Harden’s third game of 50 or more points this season. No other player has more than one.

Coach Mike D’Antoni may have recorded the 600th win of his N.B.A. career in the game, but he was more interested in making sure people recognized the greatness of Harden’s feat.

“What he just did, we kind of take it for granted a little bit,” D’Antoni told reporters. “It’s like, ‘Oh, look at that, isn’t that cute?’ It’s 57!” 

Harden, however, tried to keep the focus on Houston continuing to climb in the standings, and making up for Sunday’s loss to Orlando.

“I don’t know if it was an emotional lift,” Harden told reporters of Monday’s win, “but I know it’s crunchtime in the sense that we’ve got three starters out and guys have got to pick up the slack. There’s no excuse.”

While the outburst was hardly unexpected for Harden, who is now averaging an N.B.A.-leading 34.8 points a game, the Rockets’ personnel situation made it stand out. Paul has been out with an injured hamstring since Dec. 20 and Gordon has been out with an injured knee since Dec. 29. Houston’s injury report then took on what seemed like a crippling blow earlier on Monday when it was revealed that Capela, the team’s center — and the most frequent recipient of Harden’s assists — would be out for four to six weeks as a result of ligament damage in his right thumb.

That list of injuries left Harden starting alongside the forgettable quartet of P.J. Tucker, Nene, Austin Rivers and Danuel House Jr. No matter, as Harden joined Kemba Walker as the only players to score more than half of their team’s points in a game this season.

Harden was hot from the start, setting a Rockets record with 36 points in the first half, and he succeeded all game with his typical combination of 3-pointers (6 for 15) and free-throws (17 for 18). He also led all players in the game with nine rebounds and committed just five turnovers despite his outrageous level of usage.

The last time Harden scored fewer than 30 points was Dec. 11 in Houston’s win over the Portland Trail Blazers, and he just barely missed the feat that night, with 29 points on 10 of 21 shooting. Since then he has averaged 41.3 points a game over the 17 games in which the Rockets, who got off to a poor start this season, have gone 13-4.

In the 17 games, Harden has topped 50 points twice and 40 points 10 times. He has also recorded five triple-doubles.

While Harden’s performance on Monday broke his tie with Kobe Bryant and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar for the N.B.A.’s longest single-season streak of 30-plus points by a player not named Chamberlain, Harden has a long way to go before catching Wilt.

Chamberlain had 30-point streaks, of 20, 25, 31 and 65 games in his career, according to Basketball-Reference.com. The longest one, which came during the 1961-62 season, is likely an unbreakable record, but it comes with an amusing footnote: In Chamberlain’s last game before the streak started, he was held to 28 points in a loss to Bill Russell’s Boston Celtics. When the streak finally ended more than three months later, Chamberlain was held to 26 points — in a loss to Russell’s Celtics.

As it currently stands, though, Harden does not appear to have a foil that can be his version of Russell, so there is no telling when this streak will end.

Benjamin Hoffman is a senior staff editor and regular contributor to the Keeping Score column in sports. He joined The Times in 2005.  @BenHoffmanNYT • Facebook 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Scott Cacciola

LOS ANGELES — Vast upheaval within the Los Angeles Lakers organization continued on Friday afternoon when the team announced that Luke Walton was stepping down as coach.

The Lakers said in a statement that Walton and the team had “mutually agreed to part ways,” without elaborating. The news came three days after Magic Johnson, the team’s president for basketball operations, made the surprise announcement that he was resigning so he could devote more time to his business interests.

Walton, 39, was in his third season with the Lakers, who were expected to vie for a playoff spot after signing LeBron James, a four-time N.B.A. most valuable player, to a four-year, $154 million contract last July. Instead, the Lakers scuffled to a 37-45 record after months of general dysfunction and momentum-sapping injuries. They finished 10th in the Western Conference, well out of playoff position.

The N.B.A.’s postseason will start Saturday but without the Lakers, whose postseason drought is now at six seasons. Not even the celebrated addition of James could salvage this one, but he missed significant time with a groin injury. And even when he was on the court, he appeared detached from his teammates as weeks of misery mounted.

The Lakers are fraught with problems. When Johnson announced that he was quitting this week, he indicated that he had been planning to fire Walton and that he had the support of Jeanie Buss, the team’s controlling owner, to go forward with the move. But then Johnson resigned — in part, he said, because he could not go through with affecting someone’s “livelihood.”

Hours later, after the Lakers had closed out their season with a loss to the Portland Trail Blazers, Walton said that he was looking forward to an eventful summer with the team in hopes of making improvements. Now he is gone, too, though he may not be unemployed for long.

The Sacramento Kings immediately responded to Friday’s news by reaching out to Walton’s representatives to arrange an interview for their coaching vacancy, according to two people familiar with Sacramento’s plans who were not authorized to discuss them publicly. Walton is considered the front-runner to replace Dave Joerger, whom the Kings fired this week.

Steve Kerr, the coach of the Golden State Warriors, expressed his support for Walton, one of his former assistants.

“In this job, as a coach in the N.B.A., you are 100 percent dependent on your circumstances: the strength of your organization, the momentum, unity,” Kerr told reporters in Oakland, Calif. “Everything has to be in good order, because if it’s not, as we have witnessed with the Lakers, then there’s going to be casualties, and usually the coach is the first one.”

He added: “They’re losing one of the best humans in the N.B.A. They’re losing a guy who knows the game as well as anybody I’ve met. They’re losing somebody who players believe in.”

Walton, the son of the Hall of Fame center Bill Walton, was working with an ill-conceived roster that lacked depth, defense and perimeter shooting. Still, the pressure was on him before the season even began. Once the Lakers got off to a slow start, Johnson chastised Walton in a closed-door meeting, raising speculation that Walton was already on the hot seat.

Questions about Walton’s job security persisted throughout the season as he shuffled rotations and lineups, searching for solutions that never materialized.

Walton refused to make excuses — publicly, he was a voice of unwavering optimism amid a sea of discontent — but it hardly helped that the Lakers were troubled by injuries, especially at point guard.

Then there was James, who had been incredibly durable in his 16-year career. But during the Lakers’ Christmas Day game against the Warriors, he limped off the court with a strained groin and missed the next 17 games. Without him, the Lakers struggled. The hope was that they could regain their footing once he returned, but he was not the cure-all anyone imagined. The Lakers continued to lose with James back in the lineup, even though he said he had “activated” himself for a playoff push.

It had become clear by then, however, that the Lakers did not have any discernible chemistry, especially after Johnson and Rob Pelinka, their general manager, tried and failed to acquire the All-Star center Anthony Davis from the New Orleans Pelicans ahead of February’s trade deadline. (It was no coincidence, perhaps, that Davis and James shared an agent, Rich Paul.) The Lakers were willing to send the Pelicans several of their promising young players, including Kyle Kuzma, Brandon Ingram and Lonzo Ball, but were rebuffed in their attempts to swing a blockbuster deal.

The result was a team that seemed distracted at best and fractured at worst. Before long, the Lakers were officially eliminated from playoff contention. James did not dress for the final six games of the season.

Walton, who spent most of his 10-year N.B.A. playing career with the Lakers, winning two championships as a reserve forward, was hired as their coach in 2016 after two seasons as an assistant with the Warriors. In 2015-16, he began the season as the Warriors’ interim coach while Kerr recovered from debilitating back issues, and guided the team to a 39-4 record, which included a league-record 24 straight wins to start the season.

It was certainly an achievement, but the Warriors were coming off a championship and primed to excel. With the Lakers, Walton was trying to build something. Now, that vast project — however onerous — will continue without him.

Marc Stein contributed reporting.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Victor Mather

And the Oscar goes to … the Knicks?

Not quite. But the team — and its woeful state as one of the worst teams in the N.B.A. — did get a shout out during the Academy Awards on Sunday night.

When Samuel L. Jackson came out with Brie Larson to present the Best Adapted Screenplay award at the Oscars, he had a short preamble, a personal message to Spike Lee, a nominee and a famously devoted Knicks fan through thick and thin.

“First of all, Spike, so glad you’re sitting down,” Jackson began. “After 18 consecutive home losses, the Knicks won tonight. I repeat, the Knicks won tonight, defeated San Antonio, 130-118”

Jackson’s stats were accurate. The 18-game home losing streak had set a franchise record.

Jackson’s news flash drew a laugh from Lee, and also an exclamation. It was not audible on the broadcast, but just about every armchair lip reader believed he said, “We’re trying to tank.”

While you might think that the end of a long losing streak would delight a superfan like Lee, there are those Knicks supporters out there who don’t especially want to win many — or any — more games.

If the Knicks finish in the bottom three of the N.B.A., they will get the best possible chance, 14 percent, to land the top draft pick in June. A recent injury aside, that is still expected to be the Duke star Zion Williamson. A bottom three finish would also give the Knicks a 40 percent chance at a top three pick.

As of Monday morning, the Knicks stand at 12-48, for the second worst record. Despite their win, they look likely to grab a bottom three spot, probably alongside the Phoenix Suns (11-50) and Cleveland Cavaliers (14-46). But the Chicago Bulls are looming, two games “better” than the Cavs.

The league actually changed the draft lottery percentages this season in an effort to cut down on tanking, particularly after the 76ers went on a multiyear losing period of terrible play that got them several top picks. A year ago, the worst record offered a full 25 percent chance at No. 1, with the second and third worst teams getting 20 and 16 percent chances.

Lee has been the Knicks’ consensus No. 1 fan for years, sitting courtside and not infrequently interacting with players on both teams. Perhaps most infamously, in 1994, he jawed with the Pacers’ Reggie Miller in a conference finals game. Miller went on to the lead the Pacers to victory, drawing a “Thanks a Lot Spike” headline from The New York Daily News.

Jackson and Lee have a history as well, with Jackson appearing in “Do the Right Thing,” “School Daze,” “Jungle Fever” and “Mo Better Blues.” They are also both alumni of Morehouse College.

In this age of smartphones, there’s a good chance that those at the Oscars who cared already knew the Knicks score, perhaps including Lee.

That wasn’t the case in 1976, when Elliott Gould, presenting the award for best editing, alerted the audience that Indiana had won the men’s basketball national championship, 86-68. “I listened to the score before we went out to make the presentation,” he told Grantland. “Literally in the wings, there was a radio there.”

By the way, along with his co-writers, Lee won on Sunday, his first competitive Oscar. There is no evidence that “The Ballad of Buster Scruggs” or the other nominees engaged in any tanking.

An earlier version of this article misspelled the given name of the actor who presented the Academy Award for best editing in 1976. He is Elliott Gould, not Eliott.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Kelly Whiteside

Knicks Coach David Fizdale pulled at the edge of his graying beard as he dissected his team’s latest blowout loss. Leading a team that is now 10-42, the worst record in the N.B.A., Fizdale has had to search hard for traces of sunshine.

As he answered questions from reporters at a recent postgame news conference, the frames of his trademark glasses looked as broken as the franchise itself. The damaged black frames were held together by a glop of glue; Fizdale had cracked them earlier in the season.

It is easy to say now, but with 30 games remaining the Knicks seem to have been lost from the start. They began the season with the youngest roster in the N.B.A., with an average age of less than 24.5 years old. Development became the mantra with Fizdale, who in his first season as the Knicks head coach has frequently referred to his players as “kids.” Inexperience, a revolving-door rotation, and the absence of Kristaps Porzingis — the star forward who has been out injured since February 2018 — compounded the losing.

Now, after last week’s trade that sent Porzingis to the Dallas Mavericks ended any hope that he might return to save the season, the Knicks could be in danger of finishing with the worst record in franchise history. The low mark was a 17-65 record during the 2014-15 season. They have lost 13 in a row, 25 of the last 27 and a franchise-record 14 consecutive games at home. Not surprisingly, they were 27th in the league in offensive rating and 28th in defensive rating entering Monday night’s games.

Of course, Knicks fans have become inured to the losing — this will be the team’s sixth consecutive season without a winning record. Other than the 2012-13 season, when the Knicks reached the Eastern Conference semifinals, it has been nearly two decades since the team advanced beyond the first round of the playoffs.

Newcomers like Kevin Knox, Mitchell Robinson and Allonzo Trier may be the future, but injuries and inconsistency have marred the present. Knox, the 6-foot-9 forward chosen ninth over all in last year’s draft, is one of the youngest players in the league, at 19. In December he earned Eastern Conference Rookie of the Month honors, but his 37.1 shooting percentage needs to improve.

The Knicks took a gamble on the 7-foot-1 Robinson when they selected him in the second round of June’s draft, 36th over all. He was the only player in last year’s draft who did not play in college, overseas or in the N.B.A.’s developmental league. Instead, Robinson took a year off from organized basketball after high school to get ready for the draft.

Trier, a 6-foot-5 guard, went undrafted after three seasons at Arizona, but his early impressive play led to a two-year, $7 million deal with the Knicks.

The Knicks’ front office has been lauded for its savvy picks in last year’s draft and its recent acquisition of reclamation projects. That acumen will be tested in June. The Knicks, who own a first-round draft pick, will have the chance to select an impact player with their winning-by-losing approach.

The more they lose, the better their chances are of landing Duke’s Zion Williamson or another highly coveted prospect. Still, it is not a slam dunk — even if the Knicks fail to win 20 games this year. Being the worst team in the N.B.A. used to provide a greater advantage in the draft lottery. Because the league changed the rule to deter teams from tanking, the bottom three teams now share the same 14 percent odds of winning the No. 1 pick. Previously, the worst team held a 25 percent chance.

“Obviously, you always want to win. Every game we play we’re trying to win,” Fizdale has said.

But what if the Knicks actually did start winning, boosted by the three players acquired in the Porzingis trade with Dallas? The Knicks gained the promising guard Dennis Smith Jr., who was a first-round draft pick in 2017, and the expiring contracts of the veterans DeAndre Jordan and Wesley Matthews, plus two future first-round picks. Porzingis, Tim Hardaway Jr., Courtney Lee and Trey Burke were shipped to the Mavericks.

The Knicks’ newcomers knew only a few of the team’s offensive plays before making their debut against Memphis on Sunday, with Smith Jr. and Jordan starting. Both made standout plays early. Smith scored his first basket on a drive into the lane with an up-and-under layup and added another in a fast-break opportunity. Jordan registered a block, followed by an alley-oop dunk off an assist from Smith. All this competent basketball made some Knicks fans nervous, leading to some angst-ridden gallows humor on social media.

The Knicks held on for the loss, 96-84.

With Smith and Jordan in the starting lineup, the Knicks have continued their season theme of roster roulette. Fizdale has stitched together 57 five-man lineups that have played 10 or more minutes together this season. But of those groups, only five lineups have played 50 or more minutes together.

Consider center Enes Kanter, who started 23 games but lost his starting job as the team decided to focus on developing its younger players. He did not go quietly to the end of the bench. “I’ll go out and do my job and help my team win,” he said in late December. “If we’re winning, it’s good. But if we’re losing it’s a problem. If this adjustment is going to get us a win, cool. But if not, there’s a problem.”

But lately the most vocal cheer at Madison Square Garden has been, “We want Kanter!” as he sits on the bench. After four consecutive games in which he did not play, Kanter entered the game against Dallas last week, went to his knees and kissed the midcourt Garden logo. He explained later that he wanted to show his love for the fans since it could be one of his final games as a Knick, with the trade deadline looming.

In the second quarter against Memphis on Sunday, Fizdale looked down the bench and called for “Dennis,” referring to the newly acquired point guard Dennis Smith Jr. Kanter, however, heard “Enes” and started for the scorer’s table until he was stopped by the assistant coach Keith Smart.

“He wanted to run all the way to the scorer’s table, make it a bigger spectacle,” Fizdale said. But the damage, as it is with the Knicks, was already done.







Advertisement

