Advertisement

Supported by

By Shivani Vora

Michael S. Meldman, 60, wasn’t a golfer when he founded Discovery Land Company in 1994, a real estate business based in Scottsdale, Ariz., that has developed 25 private high-end golf communities in North America and the Caribbean.

“Master-planned communities and golf were hugely popular and the premium drivers in real estate,’’ he said, “and I saw an opportunity, even though I hadn’t ever really played golf. In fact, I only started playing seriously five years ago.”

Today, Mr. Meldman’s luxurious communities with members-only golf clubs — Baker’s Bay in the Bahamas, Yellowstone Club in Big Sky, Mont., and Silo Ridge in Amenia, N.Y., among them — range from 450 acres to 14,000 acres, or about 180 hectares to 5,700 hectares, and have homes that command prices from $3 million to $80 million.

The communities stand out for amenities that rival five-star destination resorts, with golf courses designed by Tom Fazio and Jack Nicklaus, restaurants with top-quality farm-to-table cuisine and an extensive range of wellness-themed activities. And let’s not forget the Casamigos Tequila bar at each resort. (Mr. Meldman founded the brand with the entrepreneur Rande Gerber and the actor George Clooney.)

Below are excerpts from a recent interview with Mr. Meldman.

Tell me about your vision for Discovery Land Company.

People were very interested in golf and master-planned communities, and my idea was to create a luxury concept that combined both. I wanted to find great pieces of land and build around the natural landscapes so that the communities looked like they belonged there, not like standard developments. They are all built to be sprawling with plenty of space between the homes and have lots of green space. And they all incorporate a lot of natural stone.

Although the communities are in different locations, what characteristics do they share?

They all have golf, of course. They’re all gated and have guards, clubhouses with great gyms and spas and fantastic restaurants. They’re also very family-friendly and casual. I think that a lot of golf clubs can be intimidating, but at ours, you can play barefoot in board shorts. And, we have two to three comfort stations on all the golf courses, which are basically mini-restaurants that serve everything from candy bars to foie gras to warm pretzels.

In each resort, we hire locals to teach residents about the outdoor activities in the area. At Iron Horse in Whitefish, Mont., for example, you can go fly fishing. At Makena, in Maui, you can go deep sea fishing, scuba diving and snorkeling. And in most of our oceanside locations, kids can release baby turtles into the ocean. My idea is that the people who live in my communities should embrace the areas that they’re in.

How do you choose your locations?

I seek out places where there is a good amount of land and where zoning allows us to build homes and a golf course. Also, there has to be enough to do in the area besides golf. In Silo Ridge, for example, in the Hudson Valley, which is the newest community, the horseback riding, hunting, mountain biking and hiking are all excellent.

If you had to give one piece of advice for someone looking to buy a home in a golf community what would it be?

Make sure that the developer has a track record of success and is going to commit to the vision of what they initially present.

What are the most important features to get right when designing golf community homes?

These days, I think they should have a more contemporary aesthetic as opposed to traditional, which was the norm when I started Discovery. They should have big windows that take advantage of the views, ideally of the golf course, and have spacious indoor and outdoor areas where families and friends can gather and spend time together like a nice-sized patio, a family room with comfortable, oversized couches and a dining room with a table that accommodates large groups. It’s also great to have an open-plan home where the kitchen and family room are one big room, since these are the two areas where everyone tends to spend the most time. And the homes shouldn’t be too close to each other so that everyone has enough privacy.

In your opinion, how have golf communities changed over the last decade?

They’ve gone from golf being the only consideration to being simply one of many drivers. There is now a greater emphasis on cuisine, the nongolf outdoor pursuits and activities, the family-friendliness and the safety concerns addressed by being in a gated community.

In a great golf community, there has to be something that’s appealing to each family member. We have a lot of people living in our communities who don’t golf. They’re attracted to the other things Discovery clubs offer.

Also, the demographic skews much younger. In the past, golf clubs attracted a lot of retirees, but now, there are a lot of people in their mid-30s to mid-40s enjoying them with their families that include young children.

Are golf community residents different than your usual homeowner?

I think that they’re inherently more social. They’re looking to connect with other people on a regular basis and love the idea of a sense of community. I’m not saying other homeowners are antisocial, but they may not care as much about the social offerings and accessibility to the lineup of activities.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Kevin Draper

Through Tiger Woods’s 11 years in the wilderness between major tournament wins, professional golf searched for a successor.

Would it be Phil Mickelson, the once-snakebit lefty who is actually older than Woods but who got over the hump in 2004 to become his most formidable early-career challenger? How about Rory McIlroy, the phenom from Northern Ireland, whose brutal collapse in the final round of the 2011 Masters was immediately followed by his first major championship? Or maybe Jordan Spieth, whose Masters win in 2015 tied Woods for the 72-hole record?

Ultimately, it ended up being all of them, and therefore none of them. Each had a handful of major tournament wins and at times looked as if he could dominate the sport. But none emerged as the next Tiger. Golf itself stagnated as Woods struggled, his shadow looming in a way that was almost as impactful as his presence had been for the previous decade.

Now that Woods is back on top, the question is whether the sport can take advantage of his twilight years to build something that survives when his career finally does end.

Jay Monahan, the commissioner of the PGA Tour, believes the sport is well positioned to capitalize on the re-emergence of Woods. He pointed to the new schedule, with the P.G.A. Championship held in May, and a long-term, $2 billion international television rights agreement with Discovery.

“It’s not like you change your business in a moment like this,” Monahan said. “You think about how you get to a moment like this and put your tour and product in the best possible position.”

By most metrics, golf peaked in the early 2000s, at the height of the first Tigermania. According to Gallup, in 2000, 5 percent of Americans surveyed said golf was their favorite sport to watch. By 2017, that number was 1 percent. Golf was tied with volleyball, boxing, gymnastics, motocross, figure skating and rodeo.

According to the Sports and Fitness Industry Association, 29.5 million Americans played a round of golf in 2007. In 2017, that number was 23.8 million, a decline of 19.3 percent.

Unlike most other sports, which believe fans respond most to parity, Woods’s dominance was electrifying for golf. From June 1997 — when he first became the world’s No. 1-ranked golfer — to October 2010, only four golfers besides Woods were ranked No. 1, for a total of less than a year and a half. Woods was ranked first for two different five-year streaks in that time.

Since October 2010, 11 golfers have been ranked No. 1, and only committed golf fans and golfers can name more than a few of them.

The money available to golf professionals, however, continues to grow, and if Woods keeps winning he’ll do something few athletes get to: Profit from the explosive growth in revenue that the athlete himself drove.

In professional sports, athletes benefit from the stars of the preceding generation driving interest. Magic Johnson earned less than $24 million in his entire career; LeBron James earned $33 million this season.

In 2019, the top prize at each tournament on the PGA Tour — even the Corales Puntacana Resort and Club Championship — is more than Woods earned for winning the 1997 Masters. The FedEx Cup bonus pool has doubled, to $70 million.

The massive growth in professional golf’s revenue over the past two decades isn’t due solely to Woods, but he was certainly its biggest driver. In the nearly 11 years between major wins for Woods, in which he was revealed to be a serial adulterer, pleaded guilty to reckless driving, had four back surgeries and didn’t even enter a major for two years, numerous segments of the business of golf struggled.

Nike, the company that has paid Woods hundreds of millions of dollars and whose red shirts he religiously wears on tournament Sundays, dived into the business when Woods turned pro in 1996 and signed him to an apparel endorsement contract. At the time, Nike manufactured only a limited selection of golf clothing, not equipment.

Three years later, Nike began manufacturing golf balls, and three years after that, golf clubs. Woods, who had used Titleist clubs, started using Nike equipment. But as Nike’s golf business crested with the Tiger wave, it too crashed amid Woods’s down years.

Revenue in Nike’s golf division peaked in 2013 — the year Woods had two top-10 finishes at majors and looked to have gotten his career back on track, until he either missed the cut or did not enter 15 of the next 18 majors. In 2016, the company announced it was exiting the golf equipment market. Around the same time, Adidas sold off its money-losing TaylorMade golf division.

Tim Derdenger, a professor of marketing and strategy at Carnegie Mellon’s business school and a scratch golfer who has written numerous papers on Woods and celebrity endorsements, said the golf world could learn a great deal from how consumers and golfers reacted to Woods.

As an endorser who at one point was collecting some $50 million a year in sponsorship deals, Woods had what marketing experts call a “golden halo effect,” Derdenger said. Initially, people wanted to buy products associated with Woods because they aspired to identify with him. Those deals largely went away after Woods’s sordid 2009, but if the halo effect returns, so will the sponsorships.

Derdenger said Woods also provided “informational value” — people believed the apparel and equipment he endorsed was of high quality, as long as he was high in the world golf rankings.

“There was still value in Nike retaining Tiger Woods because of this extra endorsement effect that wasn’t eroded from the scandal,” Derdenger said.

Woods has a similar effect on the tournaments he enters. When he is competing and on the leaderboard, fans view it as a quality event worthy of their attention. Saturday’s television ratings were the highest for the third round of a tournament since 2015, and Sunday’s viewership was solid considering start times were moved up hours to accommodate inclement weather.

Whether those viewers included minorities who will become golfers, as so many predicted in the late 1990s, is another question. According to the National Golf Foundation, minorities in 2017 made up 18 percent of all United States golfers, while they made up 25 percent of new golfers. Two decades ago, just 6 percent of new golfers were minorities.

“There is more diversity in the game than there was 10 years ago,” said Pete Bevacqua, the president of the NBC Sports Group and a former chief executive of the PGA of America. “I don’t think those numbers are good enough yet, but golf is aware of it and trying to make it better.”

Less clear is whether these people end up sticking with the sport, and whether they have the means to sustain their initial interest. Professional golf is incrementally more diverse than when Woods started, but there hasn’t been a wholesale influx of African-Americans or otherwise non-Caucasians into the sport at either the amateur or professional level.

Monahan, who took charge of the PGA Tour in 2017, said growing and diversifying golf’s fan base were his top priorities. That is achieved through getting people to try nontraditional versions of golf, like Topgolf and video game golf, and providing viewers myriad options to watch.

It also means getting children to play through the First Tee, a youth development organization formed in 1997, or Woods’s TGR foundation. Monahan is hopeful Woods’s win will be galvanizing. “These moments bring more people into our sport,” he said.

Email Kevin Draper at kevin.draper@nytimes.com or follow him on Twitter: @kevinmdraper.









Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Golf

By Karen Crouse

RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. — Ally McDonald started the weekend as the highest L.P.G.A. nonwinner on the ANA Inspiration leaderboard. Could she become the second consecutive player, after Pernille Lindberg, to make the year’s first major her first L.P.G.A. victory?

Back in Mississippi, her home state, the players who competed against McDonald in high school know better than to discount her chances. After she took the first-round lead, two men posted recollections on the L.P.G.A.’s Facebook page of being outclassed by McDonald, who won the boys’ state championship in her senior year at Itawamba Agricultural High School.

McDonald, 26, competed on the boys’ team because there wasn’t enough interest to field a girls’ squad. “Once I got to probably my freshman, sophomore year, the state changed regulations and I had to move back to the boys’ tees,” McDonald said on Friday, adding, “They said if I was going to play with the boys, then you’re going to have to play where the boys play from.”

McDonald, who carded a two-over 74 on Saturday and is six strokes behind the leader, Jin Young Ko, recalled winning the state title on a course that was longer than Mission Hills Country Club’s 6,834-yard layout, and in their Facebook posts, Peyton Dunlap and Chandler Thompson remembered her “whipping up” on them. There were a few exceptions, said McDonald, who went on to star at Mississippi State, “but as a whole, the guys that I was surrounded by always respected me.”

On the L.P.G.A. Tour, the women are playing for more than money, trophies and world-ranking points. “What we’re working toward is having the same amount of respect that the men get,” said Jessica Korda, the women’s world No. 11.

Korda, who is in a group tied for eighth with, among others, McDonald after a third-round 71, is the women’s leader in the inaugural Aon Risk Reward Challenge, a competition on the PGA and L.P.G.A. Tours featuring a running tally of players’ scores on designated holes. At the end of the season, the players on each tour with the lowest scores in relation to par will receive $1 million bonuses.

“It’s a great step in the right direction,” Korda said, referring to the equal prize money.

The Tuesday before the first round of the ANA Inspiration was Equal Pay Day, the point in 2019 that women had to work until to earn what men made in 2018. In golf, the gender pay disparity is glaring.

When Georgia Hall won the Women’s British Open at Royal Lytham last August, she earned $490,000. A month earlier, Francesco Molinari collected $1.89 million for his victory at the men’s British Open at Carnoustie.

“It’s not only golf, clearly, it’s society, and we need to aim for having the same opportunities and the same prize fund in this eventually,” Molinari said last month.

Molinari has spent time around Hall at events for AON, a global professional services firm that uses both as brand ambassadors. Like McDonald’s male high school teammates, Molinari has more respect for Hall after getting to know her.

“The main thing is when you meet women like that, you see in the end we do the same thing, we have the same drive, the same passion, the same dreams,” he said. “Everything is exactly the same.”

The onus is not on the women to narrow the gap, he added, but on their male peers and on those who control the corporate coffers.

“What we can do as players is support the ladies’ tour,” Molinari said. “But I think the main thing is the exposure they get. It’s nowhere near where it should be, and that creates less interest in sponsors, less money.”

Molinari’s words rang as true as bird song Saturday as the best women in the world took a back seat to the top up-and-coming women, whose final round of the Augusta National Women’s Amateur, played on the same course that will host next week’s Masters, was shown on NBC. The three hours of network coverage bestowed upon the likes of the winner, the women’s world No. 1 amateur, Jennifer Kupcho, and the runner-up, Maria Fassi of Mexico, was three hours more than was conferred on McDonald, Korda, Hall and Company at the ANA Inspiration.

To Molinari’s point, neither Bank of America nor AT&T, two of the corporate sponsors whose girl-power-themed ads were in heavy rotation during Saturday’s Augusta women’s amateur final-round coverage, sponsors an L.P.G.A. event.

“I think all we can do is try to play the best golf we can and show the public and the sponsors and the media what we can do,” Hall said.

On this great week for women’s golf, is it progress that the Augusta National Women’s Amateur runner-up had a bigger stage and audience than the reigning Women’s British Open winner?

On the eve of the ANA Inspiration, which started on Thursday, the L.P.G.A. commissioner, Mike Whan, told reporters: “In my mind, the Augusta Women’s Amateur is an evolution, not a revolution. But maybe in time, it will be the revolution that I want it to be.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Pavlos Zafiropoulos

PYLOS, Greece — On the southwestern Peloponnese coast of Greece, in walking distance from the beach, Thodoris Poulis, a construction foreman, pointed up recently at half a dozen newly built homes on the hillside, each with a sweeping view of the Bay of Navarino.

“The older sort of development with a few small houses is going away,” he said, “and we’re getting more large stand-alone homes — expensive builds, in the style of villas.”

As he spoke, he was overseeing work on what will become just such a villa; dubbed the Lemon Project, this home near the town of Pylos will have a pool, a sea view and landscaped gardens, complete with citrus orchard.

The developer of that property, Iliopoulos Real Estate and Constructions, is a small family business run by two brothers, Minas and Vasilis Iliopoulos. Until recently, their business usually involved building or renovating modest homes on plots owned by others here in the Messenia region.

But with the Lemon Project, they have become developers, buying the land themselves and building a luxury home that they will put on the market for about 800,000 euros, or about $900,000.

Part of the reason they can do this can be found in a very different construction site only a short distance away.

In the hills above Pylos, large machines crack and pulverize boulders clawed from the ground.

Dwarfed by rising slopes on either side, they are carving out what will become an artificial lake — an irrigation reservoir for two new 18-hole golf courses. When completed in 2021, the courses will unfold over 370 acres across the hilltops and provide golfers with sweeping views of the olive groves and the sea below.

These courses, designed by the two-time Masters champion José María Olazábal and christened Navarino Hills by the developer, Temes, are a major undertaking by any standard. Yet they are only the latest project on which the company has broken ground in a multifaceted effort to remake this onetime sleepy region into a world-renowned golf and holiday destination under the brand Costa Navarino.

Alongside its flagship Navarino Dunes resort, with its two five-star hotels, extensive spa and myriad other amenities, Temes has already built two other 18-hole signature golf courses in the area: The Dunes Course, which opened with the resort in 2010, and The Bay Course, opened in 2011 and just below Navarino Hills.

They are responding to what has become a truism in the golf course business. “With golf courses there is the following issue: One equals almost none,” said Achilles Constantakopoulos, the chairman of Temes. He cited a survey by the International Association of Golf Tour Operators that found that only 15 percent of dedicated golfers would consider visiting a new destination with just one golf course. That figure rises to 75 percent with three golf courses and to 100 percent with five.

“What’s important is not just to have a golf course, but to be considered a golf destination,” Mr. Constantakopoulos said, “then it becomes a decision-making factor.”

Ambitious as it may be, turning Messenia into a place that lures high-spending golfers away from other more established destinations is just one aspect of the company’s multipronged strategy. It is one that seeks to not only increase tourism to Messenia, but to do so year-round — an almost unheard-of goal in a country where the overwhelming majority of visitors arrive between June and September. Golf serves that purpose, by providing a reason to visit outside the summer months.

Another key aim is for some of the newly acquired visitors to purchase homes, becoming regular contributors to the local economy for years to come.

That strategy appears to be bearing fruit beyond the carefully manicured grounds of Costa Navarino.

In the Iliopoulos brothers’ office in Pylos, lined with images of properties for sale, a cluster of golf clubs stands in a corner. On the shelf above it sits a glass container half filled with golf balls printed with the company’s logo. Neither of the brothers plays golf.

Putting up a development like the Lemon Project would have been unthinkable only a few years ago; in 2013, thanks to the uncertainty swirling around Greece’s fiscal crisis and with domestic bank lending effectively nonexistent, the construction business in the Messenia area had ground almost to a halt. But things soon turned around.

“Since 2016 we have been on an upward trajectory,’’ said Minas Iliopoulos. “We have been growing every year. And tourism is on the rise. Quality tourism.”

The brothers’ optimism does not appear to be unfounded. Savills Greece, a real estate agency, said in a statement that “the second home market in Messenia has changed drastically in the last 10 years.”

“Interest for a second home in the area has significantly risen,” the agency said, “and thus prices have also gone up, since owners see continued demand.”

According to Savills Greece, average prices for second homes in Messenia are generally between €230 and €325 per square foot, with prices exceeding €465 per square foot for “very special properties.” While Savills notes that in many cases sellers’ initial asking prices are overly optimistic, “above average prices have shown significant growth in the last decade.”

Temes’s grand plan to remake the region is one that has been decades in the making, essentially the vision of Vassilis Constantakopoulos, Achilles Constantakopoulos’s father and the founder of Temes. He died in 2011, but is still referred to as the Captain by many Temes employees and Messenians alike.

Born to a poor family in the Messenian village of Diavolitsi, Vassilis Constantakopoulos left his homeland for Athens during the 1946-49 Greek Civil War at around 13 years of age.

By the mid-1970s he had founded the shipping company Costamare, through which he amassed a great fortune. In the 1980s he began regularly visiting his homeland and buying land piecemeal, laying the groundwork for what would become today’s Costa Navarino.

“His vision was to create a new tourism destination in the Mediterranean and in parallel to give work to the people, so they wouldn’t need to leave as he had left at 12, 13 years old,” Achilles Constantakopoulos said. “He had a very strong feeling for the people of the area. And he saw that Messenia as an area had great potential for tourism which was not being realized.”

In the meantime, one of the most significant obstacles to tourism in the region — its historically poor transportation links — has been largely overcome.

Once a five-hour journey along winding country roads, the completion of a major infrastructure project has turned the drive from Athens into a two-and-a-half hour trip along a highway that slices through the mountainous landscape via tunnels and bridges.

And the airport of the city Kalamata, 45 minutes from Pylos, now receives more than 1,300 international flights a year — up 450 percent from a decade ago — in part because Temes has spent millions to woo international carriers. In 2012 the airport was renamed the Captain Vassilis Constantakopoulos Kalamata International Airport.

“Messenia is one of the few destinations in Europe which is at once easily accessible but unspoiled,” Achilles Constantakopoulos said. “This combination is very rare.”

With Messenia now on the international tourism map, in 2017 Temes rolled out another key stage of its plan: offering upscale holiday homes for purchase.

The Navarino Residences were the first to go on the market. The luxury villas, located at Navarino Dunes, are fully customizable, have a minimum floor space of 4,300 square feet and a starting price of €2.4 million. Of the 30 initially offered, 18 have been purchased. Another 20 will be offered at a later date.

Their architectural design is based in part on a 19th-century building preserved on the Costa Navarino grounds, which was recently renovated to become a luxury villa.

Navarino Residences were followed in 2018 by Navarino Apartments. At the lower end of the company’s planned real estate offerings, these 1,300-square-foot units have a starting price just under €500,000.

In both cases, buyers get multiple benefits from owning a property integrated into the resort, including free access to the complex’s amenities and rent-sharing programs that will generate profit when they are away.

Yet even with the interest that Costa Navarino has generated, second-home prices in the immediate vicinity of the resort remain significantly below those in more established Greek holiday destinations such as the Cyclades or Corfu. In these areas, according to Savills, average prices for holiday homes are about €370 per square foot; luxury homes go for above €740 per square foot.

And further afield, around Kalamata and toward the eastern boundary of Messenia near the Mani Peninsula, many properties remain accessible to buyers of even modest means.

“There are excellent opportunities anywhere in the Messenian Peloponnese,” said Mary O’Connor, who for 20 years has run a real estate business in Kalamata with her husband, specializing in the second-home market. “Except for around Pylos,” she added, where properties have become scarce. But even there, she said, “there are a few good plots left.’’

In other areas and villages, Ms. O’Connor said, plots and fixer-upper houses can still be bought for prices below €50,000.

George Elliott, 67, bought a fixer-upper in Messenia in 2001 and now lives there about six months a year. His house was once the village’s olive press. (The basement still has lots of the original machinery.) He is grateful that the Costa Navarino development has helped bring decent transportation to the area.

He would happily play golf, too. But he plays only in London, where he said it costs about $17. The Costa Navarino golf courses are just too expensive for him. “I don’t have that kind of pension,” he said.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Bryson DeChambeau seemed about as excited as a mad scientist gets as Masters week kicked off, which meant he stopped just short of jumping for joy.

Not to worry. The jump might come Sunday for DeChambeau, assuming the planets align, the morning dew on the golf ball is at proper levels and putts don't bounce off the flagstick.

If not, well, all bets are off.

Golf's most noted iconoclast — the only one in the field with irons that are all the same length — tees off in his third Masters not only with visions of a green jacket but a legitimate chance of being in the mix late Sunday afternoon.

And why not? DeChambeau has won five times in the past year, rising from 62nd in the world golf rankings to sixth while building a reputation as both a crafty calculator and steely closer.

Not only that, he discovered something last week — just what he won't say — that might make him just as effective with his short wedges as he has been with the rest of his game.

"I've had some disadvantages with a couple of the irons I've had for a little bit," DeChambeau said. "And just being able to practice and getting comfortable and seeing the ball flights come out the proper way for the first time ever in my life is pretty cool."

That's DeChambeau. Always tweaking, always studying.

He's called the mad scientist for a reason. DeChambeau's swing is a study in the science of single plane, he plays irons that are all the same length so everything can be repeatable, and he studies contours in greens like they were clues to where the late union leader Jimmy Hoffa is buried.

What he would like to be called is Masters champion. And that's why he was working last week with new wedges — still the same length as his other irons — in search of a breakthrough that might trim a shot or two off at Augusta National.

"I've been fortunate to win a lot of tournaments using the equipment that I've had so far and it's been great," DeChambeau said. "But there's always that little bit of room for improvement. So we've been working quite heavily this past week in trying to figure out some things that could give me an advantage this week."

What may not be an advantage for DeChambeau is that there's no green mapping book for players at the Masters. Instead of staring at diagrams of contours on a green to see how a putt breaks, he'll have to rely on looking at the contours themselves.

But he's got a plan for that, too, just like he has a plan for most things in his golf career.

"I have to practice a lot more hitting breaking putts because I can't just bring out my compass and go, oh, it's 3 percent and here it is," DeChambeau said. "I have to look at and walk around and go, 'OK, I'm acclimated to 3 percent.'"

If the calculations are all a bit too much to understand, don't worry. Arnold Palmer would have been confused, too, and he won four green jackets.

Technology, though, is the new wave in golf, and DeChambeau is its leader in the clubhouse. He uses words in conversation that are heard more often in physics classes than golf courses and talks about scientific advances in golf like other players might be discussing the latest in movies.

That includes spending more time than usual this week figuring out exactly what moisture on the clubface will do at Augusta National, where rain is forecast during the week. To make sure he's doing it right, DeChambeau sprays balls on the practice range with salt water to see how they react.

"That's going to affect the way the ball reacts on the face," he said. "You know, there's a percentage to that, and we have to account for that. If you don't, you're going to hit it to 30, 40 feet, instead of 10 feet."

It may be too much information for casual golf fans, or even many of DeChambeau's fellow pros. No one else has really embraced his thoughts on swing plane and single length irons, but DeChambeau says he hopes some children taking up the game try and adopt it.

For now, the 25-year-old is focused on his wedges and the greens at Augusta National. He first came here as an amateur in 2016 and thought he had a chance at winning before hitting it into the bushes on 18 on his second day, and only broke par one round last year before finishing in a tie for 38th.

Whatever happens, one thing is for sure.

If DeChambeau doesn't win, he can't just blame it on bad luck.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

(Reuters) - Tiger Woods' victory at the Masters golf tournament on Sunday, his first major victory since 2008, is expected to lift sales for sponsors, broadcasters and golf courses lucky enough to host a tournament with Woods playing.

The competition put the 43-year-old back on top of a sport he helped transform 25 years ago. 

"Tiger sells golf," says Eric Smallwood, president of Apex Marketing Group, Inc., a Michigan analytics firm. Apex found that Nike earned $22.5 million worth of brand exposure just from Woods’ final round, with Nike’s "Swoosh" logo splashed on his hat, shirt, pants and shoes. Nike stock was up about one percent on Monday. 

Tournament broadcaster CBS Corp saw a ratings bump. Based on preliminary data, the final round of Sunday's tournament was the highest-rated morning golf broadcast since 1986, when CBS started collecting that data. The tournament, which is usually broadcast in the afternoon, was rescheduled to the morning because of weather.

CBS has the rights to the PGA Championship in May and expects prices for advertising time that is still available to rise as a result of Woods' Masters victory, according to a source familiar with the matter.

The golf demographic is wealthier and better-educated than other sports fans, so TV ratings are valued more highly because they’re more apt to turn into sales, even of big-ticket items, said Neal Pilson, president of Pilson Communications and former president of CBS Sports. 

“Historically, events where Tiger Woods is on leaderboards on Sunday generated 30 to 40 percent higher ratings in the United States for those tournaments,” Pilson said. 

MAKINGS OF A COMEBACK

Woods was a 20-year-old prodigy when he turned pro in 1996. Less than a year later he was ranked No. 1 in the world. He struck lucrative endorsement deals - including a five-year, $40 million deal with Nike - and golf experienced a surge in popularity. 

Then Woods' personal life collapsed and with it, his brand. In 2009, after the news of multiple infidelities, he lost endorsement deals with companies like AT&T Inc and Accenture Plc. Other sponsors, such as Procter & Gamble Co's Gillette and Berkshire Hathaway Inc's NetJets, kept their contracts with Woods but stopped using him in marketing. 

Four back surgeries later, Woods continued to suffer professionally and in the public eye. In 2017 police arrested him for driving under the influence; he pleaded guilty to reckless driving and entered a program for first-time offenders. 

In 2018 Woods began a professional comeback that culminated at Sunday's Masters. After his victory, Nike, which stood behind Woods throughout his darker years, posted an ad on its website titled “Tiger Woods: Same Dream."

“In sports you have heroes, villains and underdogs," said Benjamin Hordell, founder of digital marketing and advertising firm DXagency. "Tiger has lived all of it. That’s amazing from a storytelling perspective. People will root against him, but they’re watching." 

On Monday U.S. President Donald Trump said he would award Woods the Presidential Medal of Freedom. 

 (Reporting by Helen Coster and Hilary Russ. Additional reporting by Sheila Dang. Editing by Kenneth Li and Cynthia Osterman)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Shivani Vora

It is a buyer’s market for consumers interested in buying property in a golf community, whether a hotel resort with residences or a residential-only development.

Gregory Nathan, the chief business officer for the National Golf Foundation, a golf market research provider, said that a building boom from 1986 to 2006 produced a flood of homes at top-quality golf courses, mostly in the United States but internationally, too.

“There is still plenty of supply to spare, and the competition among golf communities to woo buyers is fierce,” he said.

While interest in golf community homes waned after the 2008 recession, that is no longer the case, said Gregory Daco, the chief United States economist for Oxford Economics USA.

“The global economy is stronger, and people have more disposable income to spare, which means that they’re more apt to invest in secondary purchases like golf homes,” he said.

But before buyers decide to live in such a community, they should consider several factors. Here is advice on how to make an informed decision about buying a golf home:



IT’S ALL ABOUT THE LOCATION

First and foremost, even before looking at prospective properties, consider the destinations.

“You should like the idea of living where you’re looking,” said Patrick Melton, a co-founder and managing partner of South Street Partners, a private equity real estate investment firm based in Charlotte, N.C., and Charleston, S.C. The firm owns Kiawah Island Club, a golf community near Charleston with residences and two golf courses.

If you’ve spent time in and enjoy Miami or Spain’s Costa del Sol region, both of which have an abundance of golf communities, for example, seek out homes in these areas. On the flip side, if you’re enamored of countryside golf communities but don’t particularly like being in remote settings, look for a site that’s in a suburb and close to a city.

Many consumers fall in love with a golf community and buy a home there, Mr. Melton said, only to realize afterward that they’re not thrilled with the area.

Also, consider whether being near quality medical care, an international airport, noteworthy restaurants and an arts and culture scene is a priority.

“Your home could tick all the boxes in terms of what you’re looking for, but it may be an hour’s drive to a major grocery store or hospital, which could be a hassle,” Mr. Melton said.

And don’t forget about the weather. Some destinations are too cold to play golf or spend time outdoors in winter or may have a rainy or hurricane season, while others are almost too hot in summer, said Liz Rowlinson, editor of A Place in the Sun magazine, a division of the British-based real-estate consulting brand of the same name.

“If you want to play golf year-round and want a home that’s appealing to be in year-round, you should look for a property located in a region with a stable climate, save for maybe a few months,” she said.

But location also means the exact position of your home, Ms. Rowlinson said.

“Living right next to a green or fairway sounds idyllic but early morning mowers can be noisy, sprinklers come on during the night, and fast-moving golf balls landing in your pool is tiresome,” she said.

The bottom line is that if you’re sensitive to noise, the crack of tee shot drives is far louder than the murmur of greenside putts.

Similarly, you may like views across fairways, but will you be happy with golfers staring into your home as they pass by? A strategically placed line of bushes can provide privacy.

If you’re an avid golfer, the number of other good courses nearby should figure in, too; playing at your own club week after week may get dull.

“Ideally, you’d want at least a few public courses less than an hour’s drive from you, so you have the option for some variety when you play,” Ms. Rowlinson said.



FIND AN EXPERIENCED BROKER

More often than not, buyers interested in golf communities usually don’t work with brokers who are well informed about the areas they’re looking in, said Blake Plumley, the chief executive of Capital Pursuits, a development consulting firm specializing in resort residential communities. When interviewing potential brokers, ask them how many properties they have sold in the communities. Ideally, it should be several.

Also, inquire about three positive aspects and three drawbacks of living in those communities. “Your broker should be able to easily answer this,” Mr. Plumley said.

The broker should personally know the golf club’s membership director, the general manager, the head golf pro and a few other key figures in the communities. “You want a broker who can directly introduce you to these people,” Mr. Plumley said.



LOOK FOR KEY AMENITIES

Successful golf communities offer much more than golf — so much that they most likely attract plenty of nongolfing residents, Ms. Rowlinson said.

Desirable amenities include a clubhouse with more than one social gathering space, tennis courts, an outdoor pool with a grill area, a high-quality restaurant, a casual dining option and a bar. A family-friendly club is also important. The best communities have a robust lineup of activities for children and families, such as summer camps, boating and hiking excursions, pool days, fun food-themed dinners such as taco night and more.

“The more amenities a community has, the broader its appeal is, making your home more sellable if you ever look to move,” Mr. Melton said.



UNDERSTAND FINANCIAL COMMITMENTS

Living in a golf development comes with additional costs that could include club dues, property taxes and monthly maintenance fees. These costs can vary greatly from one community to the next, and while the home you are considering might be affordable, the price of living in the community could be exorbitant.

Also, some communities assess their residents, while others don’t. That means that residents are billed for the cost of projects such as a new health club or repairing the clubhouse’s leaky roof. Financially sound communities have a healthy cash reserve to pay for such projects (the exact number varies, depending on a community’s size and the scale of its amenities), but according to Mr. Plumley, some communities have no or limited money in reserve. Your broker will be able to give you that information.

“Be careful what you sign up for, because you could unexpectedly be out a few thousand dollars at any given time,” he said.

ARE YOU WILLING TO PLAY BY THE RULES?

All golf communities have regulations that residents are expected to follow. Mr. Melton said that buyers should be sure to understand what these rules are and decide whether they’re comfortable abiding by them.

One of the more significant rules is whether all residents are required to be members of the golf club. Whether you’re a golfer or not, it may be a smarter move to live in a community where you’re not required to be a member; otherwise, when you look to resell, a potential buyer base will be more limited.

And if you are interested in becoming a member, know what you are signing up for. If you ever move and need to give up your membership, for example, you may be required to pay dues until someone can take it over, which could take a few years.

“I know of instances where members have had to pay dues for five years after they’ve moved away,” Mr. Melton said.

Also, most communities have design guidelines, and you want to make sure that the aesthetic matches yours. For example, you most likely won’t be allowed to build an art deco home in a community where all the properties are built in a contemporary style.



ASK IF THE GOLF COURSE IS PROTECTED

Is there a chance of your community’s golf course closing so that homes or other structures can be built?

Ask your real-estate agent to find out. In some cases, a golf course is protected by its owner through a conservation easement or deed restriction stating that the land can never be anything but a course. But some courses are not protected, which means that the owners have the right to close them.

“I wouldn’t buy in communities where the golf course isn’t protected because your property has the potential to lose 25 percent or more of its value,” Mr. Plumley said.



PLAN TO HANG OUT FOR A WHILE

It’s vital to spend a few days actually living at a community you are interested in, Mr. Plumley said.

“You want to make sure that you’re comfortable and like being surrounded by the people who will be your neighbors,” he said.

Most communities offer discounted stays for serious buyers, who should take up the offer and play the golf course, use the pool and dine in the restaurants.

While you’re there, be sure to interact with the staff as much as possible, Mr. Melton said.

“In good golf communities, many of the employees have been around for decades, and you should definitely like them, because they’re the ones who are going to be helping you,” he said.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Jeff Shain

It began, in a very real sense, as an oasis in the desert.

When the first shots were struck at what was then the Karl Litten Desert Classic, Emirates Golf Club was flanked by little but sand. Aerial photos from the time showed a stark contrast between the club’s green fairways and various shades of brown outside its borders.

That was 30 years ago. Dubai, United Arab Emirates, was just starting to introduce itself as a tourist destination, and golf offered a natural fit with its winter sunshine and miles of undeveloped acreage. The European Tour was looking to expand and willing to take a chance.

The gamble worked. Enticed by Dubai’s world-class accommodations — and the occasional appearance fee — players quickly took notice. In time, the renamed Omega Dubai Desert Classic could boast about having more star power than whatever PGA Tour event it went up against.

Dubai’s success bred a second venture in the Middle East in 1998, the Qatar Masters. Abu Dhabi, another emirate, joined the schedule eight years later, and Dubai added a second event, the DP World Tour Championship, when the tour sought a big-finish season finale.

As the tour returns from its winter break, this week’s Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship presented by EGA is the first of six events set for the Middle East in 2019. That’s 12 percent of the European Tour’s schedule and some of its most attractive stops.

Abu Dhabi this year joins the Rolex Series, a collection of eight showcase events offering purses of at least $7 million. Brooks Koepka, the winner of last year’s United States Open and P.G.A. Championship, and Dustin Johnson will be among the challengers as Tommy Fleetwood seeks a third straight crown. In all, 15 of the top 50 in the world rankings are expected to play.

The tour shifts to Dubai a week later, where two of the past three Masters winners foreshadowed those victories by conquering Emirates Golf Club three months before. In all, on six occasions Dubai champions have won a major later that same year.

Qatar used to make up the third leg of what is called the desert swing, but with the addition of the NBO Oman Open last year and a tournament in Saudi Arabia this month, the tour has opted to break them into two clusters. The Saudi International powered by SBIA finishes the January swing; Oman and Qatar go back-to-back in March.

The DP World Tour Championship also is part of the Rolex Series, bringing the season to a close in November. In all, the six tournaments will hand out about $25 million in prize money.

“Across the board, our golfers love playing in the Middle East,” Keith Pelley, the European Tour’s chief executive, said when the Saudi International was announced last year. “They feel incredibly safe there, they are treated exceptionally well, and all of our host courses are terrific.”

The circuit’s Middle East success also empowered tour officials to continue pursuing territorial expansion, with tournaments now spread as far as South Africa, China, Malaysia and India.

Over time, the Middle East has hosted 64 European Tour events. Last year’s five stops in the region drew 22 players who began the year among the top 40 of the world rankings. Johnson ventured to Abu Dhabi for the second consecutive year; Matt Kuchar made his first visit to Abu Dhabi, and Pat Perez to Dubai.

“It’s a place I’ve always seen on TV, always kind of admired and wanted to see for myself,” Kuchar said upon arrival in Abu Dhabi.

“It’s always neat to pick up different things that you just don’t get from TV,” he added, “to actually put your hands on things and to see a different culture and see a different place.”

It was uncharted territory for everyone, from a golf standpoint, when Dubai made the pitch to bring a European Tour event there in 1989.

Emirates Golf Club had just opened; the Majlis course, in fact, was the first grassed golf course in the region. What little golf was played in the Middle East had been done on sand greens.

Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, the ruler of Dubai who would later become prime minister of the United Arab Emirates, envisioned golf as a tourism driver. And the best way to sell the concept was to bring some of the world’s best golfers to play a tournament.

He found a willing ear in Ken Schofield, then the European Tour’s chief executive. For several years, Schofield had been looking for ways to expand the tour at a time when winter left much of Europe unable to partake in the sport.

The tour typically opened its season in April, after the Masters, either in Spain or Italy. There already had been one trial outside the Continent when the Tunisian Open started in 1982. That lasted four years; a Morocco tournament in 1987 didn’t last.

In that sense, the tour wasn’t averse to taking risks. But Dubai was so new to the sport that no one really had an idea what to expect.

Complicating matters was that Emirates Golf Club was then about 15 miles from Dubai’s outer limits. Players had first-class accommodations at the Intercontinental hotel, but almost nothing stood between the course and the city.

The course site was selected for its elevation and its natural terrain — one could see the Persian Gulf from the eighth green — but infrastructure was limited. The first edition had just one hospitality tent, two small grandstands and one scoreboard.

Nonetheless, an estimated 7,000 people, many of them European expatriates, came out to watch.

“It was like having a home game in the Middle East, only with perfect weather and the most magnificent course,” Phil Parkin, a golfer who is now an analyst, told The National, a newspaper based in Abu Dhabi, in 2015.

Mark James captured the inaugural, beating Peter O’Malley in a playoff.

The 1991 edition was not held because of the Persian Gulf war, but any concerns about the Desert Classic’s future disappeared the next year when Seve Ballesteros made it one of the final victories of his Hall of Fame career.

In 1994, Ernie Els scored his first European Tour win when he cruised to a six-shot romp in Dubai. Five months later, he stamped his name on a bigger stage by winning the U.S. Open at Oakmont.

Tiger Woods has teed it up seven times in Dubai, winning twice. He also helped create some of the event’s more famous images in 2004 when he struck shots from the Burj al Arab hotel’s helipad.

These days, the Dubai skyline is easily seen from the Emirates Golf Club fairways.

“It’s grown from a little unknown dune that nobody knew about back then to one of the tourist destinations of the world,” said Thomas Bjorn, last year’s winning European Ryder Cup captain, who made his Dubai debut in 1996.

Seeing Dubai’s success, the Qatar Masters made its debut in 1998 with Andrew Coltart taking home the trophy. Adam Scott has won it twice, as have Paul Lawrie and Branden Grace.

The Abu Dhabi Golf Championship came along in 2006, with five of the first six titles split between Martin Kaymer (three) and Paul Casey (two). The DP World Tour Championship began in 2009, with Rory McIlroy and Henrik Stenson each winning twice.

Even with the additions of Oman and Saudi Arabia, Pelley, the European Tour’s chief executive, hinted that the Middle East expansion may not be done. Bahrain was on the schedule for one year, hosting the short-lived Volvo Golf Champions in 2011 before the Arab Spring uprisings prompted organizers to move the 2012 event.

“To be honest, in the Middle East we’re open to hosting tournaments in any countries that want to support golf,” Pelley said. “At the moment we have six events, but could we feasibly have another one in there? I think so.”



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Richard Goldstein

Gene Littler, a quietly outstanding golfer who was known as Gene the Machine for an uncommonly smooth and consistent swing that propelled him to the 1961 United States Open championship, died on Friday in San Diego. He was 88.

His death was announced by the PGA Tour. His son, Curt, told The San Diego Union-Tribune that he had neuropathy in his legs and had had several falls. In 1972, Littler had surgery for lymph cancer that had seemingly ended his career.

In his prime, though self-taught, he had “a perfect swing,” said Gene Sarazen, a winner of seven major championships. “Like Sam Snead’s, only better.”

Littler was typically self-effacing in assessing his form. “I just put the ball down and hit,” he once said.

Unassuming and devoid of glamour in an era dominated by Arnold Palmer, Jack Nicklaus and Gary Player, and relatively unimposing at 5 foot 9 and 160 pounds or so, Littler simply went about winning tournaments: 29 on the PGA Tour and another eight on what was then the Senior PGA Tour.

Littler, who lost two other majors in playoffs and another by one stroke, was a seven-time Ryder Cup player and was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame in 1990.

Littler was virtually ignored by the galleries in the early stages of the 1961 United State Open’s final round at Oakland Hills in Michigan. He was among a pack chasing Doug Sanders, who was three shots ahead after the third round, and he had injured a rib earlier in the year, sidelining him for two months. He had won a total of $116 in his first five tournaments of 1961. Not only that, but Littler needed to adjust his widely envied swing a few days before the tournament.

As Littler later told it, Ted Kroll, a fellow professional, “told me to hit the ball more directly, or more upright.”

Littler added, “I had a tendency to swing flat.”

It was Littler’s brilliant putting that carried him to victory at Oakland Hills, whose undulating greens frustrated many of the other contenders. He one-putted on six holes of the final round and needed only the customary two putts at the others, and he sank 15-foot putts at Nos. 7 and 13. After hitting into a bunker guarding the green on the 18th hole, he two-putted for a bogey 5 and a two-under-par 68 that bested Sanders and Bob Goalby by a shot.

Gene Alec Littler was born on July 21, 1930, in San Diego and grew to love golf while playing on area courses. He graduated from San Diego State University and then entered the Navy. He won the United States Amateur and played in the Walker Cup amateur competition between the United States and a British-Irish team in 1953.

The prominent golf writer Herbert Warren Wind was impressed by the fluidity of such a young player’s swing.

“Gene took the club back with a very, very slow, easy, relaxed rhythm, then paused a lazy second at the top before droning slowly down into the ball, delaying his accelerated hitting action until the very last moment when the club head was only two feet or so from the ball,” Wind wrote in 1955 in Sports Illustrated.

While still an amateur, Littler won the San Diego Open in January 1954, and he turned pro soon afterward. He almost won the United States Open in June 1954, losing to Ed Furgol by one stroke, and then won four tournaments in 1955. He captured the Tournament of Champions in Las Vegas three consecutive times, from 1955 to 1957. Littler lost to Billy Casper, a friend since their boyhood in San Diego, in an 18-hole playoff at the 1970 Masters.

Two years later, Littler was found to have lymph cancer, requiring surgery. Much of the muscular structure on his left side was removed. But through arduous rehabilitation, he was able to regain the use of his left arm and rejoin the tour. He won the St. Louis Children’s Hospital Classic in July 1973 and received the Ben Hogan Award as comeback player of the year and the Bob Jones Award for distinguished sportsmanship in golf.

Littler went to a playoff at the 1977 P.G.A. Championship at Pebble Beach, losing to Lanny Wadkins on the third hole of sudden death after leading by five strokes with nine holes to play.

He retired from the PGA Tour after that season and joined the fledgling Senior PGA Tour in 1981. Three years later he fell from a ladder while working on one of his antique cars and fractured his left arm, which was already weakened from cancer surgery. But he won six times on the Senior Tour after that.

In addition to his son, survivors include his wife, Shirley, and a daughter, Suzanne.

For all his achievements, and all the admiration for his swing, Littler struggled with self-doubt.

“I never gave myself enough credit,” he told The Union-Tribune in 1987. “If I could change anything, I’d change my attitude. I’d come out again like Nicklaus or Palmer. I think I had a lot of ability but I never had what those guys had, that confidence.”

The World Golf Hall of Fame quoted him once saying: “I drew a big gallery today. I was paired with Palmer.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

An average of 10.8 million people watched the CBS coverage of the final round of the Masters as Tiger Woods got his first victory in a major in 11 years.

CBS said in a release that it was the most-watched morning golf broadcast since 1987, which is the earliest data the network has. The final round was moved up five hours to 9 a.m. EDT Sunday because of the threat of inclement weather. The afternoon encore presentation averaged 4.5 million.

The previous high for a morning golf broadcast, according to Nielsen, was 8.56 million for ABC's telecast of the 2000 British Open, which was won by Woods at St. Andrews. Last year's final round of the British Open on NBC averaged 6.48 million, when Woods was in contention, and the final day of the Ryder Cup from Paris averaged 2.67 million.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

PEBBLE BEACH, Calif. — The AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am never fails to rattle Darius Rucker’s nerves. This year though, Rucker, the three-time Grammy Award winning musician, had more to fret about than hitting a spectator or getting in the way of his pro partner, Kenny Perry.

“Now you’re scared that somebody’s going to come call a rules violation on you with something that you don’t know about,” Rucker said before the tournament began last week.

The pros are just as worried. The United States Golf Association and the R&A revised the sport’s rule book to simplify the game and speed up the pace of play. But so far the changes, which took effect at the start of 2019, have been harder to follow than a game of Simon Says.

In the few weeks since the modifications took effect, players have repeatedly sought guidance from the nearest rules official, their caddies or pieces of paper tucked inside their golf bags, undermining for now, at least, the stated intention of making things simpler and faster.

And it’s adding an extra bit of hesitancy to the pros’ trip through the course. During a rain-sodden second round at Pebble Beach on Friday, Hunter Mahan was forced to consult a tournament-issued rules sheet before touching his ball. “We thought we knew what the rule was,” Mahan said, “but there’s no clarity, so having an official or actually having it written down is the only true clarification.”

One new rule has lowered the height from which players make a drop: it is now from the knees, rather than the shoulders, a change that the former men’s world No. 1 Adam Scott described as awkward. Whenever he bends over or squats with the ball, he can’t help but imagine rules officials assigned to monitor potential rules violations squinting at their screens, scrutinizing his release down to the inch.

“They’ve just written more gray areas into the game that were not necessary,” said Scott, who won’t make a drop without asking his caddie or a nearby official if he has the height right.

Even those enforcing the rules have been confused about how to interpret them. During the second round of the Phoenix Open earlier this month, Denny McCarthy was assessed a two-stroke penalty under Rule 10.2b(4), a new regulation that prohibits caddies from standing behind players as they line up for their shots.

While McCarthy took a few practice swings, his caddie stood behind him. McCarthy stepped away before hitting the shot, and when he came back to the ball and set his stance, his caddie was standing off to the side. The next day, the PGA Tour announced that it had rescinded the penalty after reviewing McCarthy’s actions, and his score of 67 became a 65.

Somewhat lost in the turbulence created by the alignment rule in the men’s game is the fact that the change was seen as directed at the L.P.G.A., where caddies lining up players had been more common. Brittany Lincicome, an eight-time L.P.G.A. tour winner and two-time major champion, said she was glad “it wasn’t one of us” who became the rule’s first victim.

After the caddie-alignment episode with McCarthy, and several similar situations involving other players, the U.S.G.A. and the R&A issued a clarification: If players reset their stances after their caddies have surveyed a shot, there is no penalty.

“Going in, we knew there were certain things that were going to come up that you’d say, ‘We’re not sure we contemplated this or the intention was never to have this outcome,’” Mike Davis, the chief executive of the U.S.G.A. told The Global Golf Post. He added, “All in all, in terms of how they’re being perceive around the globe, it’s very positive.”

That wasn’t the case for Rickie Fowler, who took dead aim at the caddie-alignment rule during the Phoenix Open. “You’re talking about growing the game and making things play faster and whatnot,” he said, “but that’s not growing the game.”

Adding to Fowler’s exasperation was a run-in with one of the rule book’s unchanged regulations on the Sunday of the tournament. He took a one-stroke penalty for hitting a shot into the water, then absorbed another one-stroke penalty after his ball rolled back into the hazard several seconds after he walked toward the green to survey his chip.

After carding a triple bogey, Fowler, in a show of gallows humor, petitioned the rules official, Slugger White, for a rules modification.

Fowler hung on to win, but Tony Finau, who watched the round unfold on television after missing the cut, saw the gravity in Fowler’s joking.

“As I watched that transpire, I couldn’t help but think, This is not what the integrity of the game is about,” Finau said. “He didn’t do anything for that ball to move.”

One player’s mishap is another’s teachable moment. An L.P.G.A. rules official disseminated the video of Fowler playing the hole, noting that he could have avoided the second penalty by making his first two drops, then using a tee to mark the spot where he intended to place the ball. After surveying his shot, he could have then replaced the tee with his ball before taking his shot.

Breaking up the sequence of drop-drop-place like that was illuminating to Lincicome: “I didn’t even know that was a thing,” she said.

Another new wrinkle on the course this year is using the flagstick as a backboard on putts; to speed up play, golfers can leave the pin in no matter where they are on the course, including the green. Anticipating the outcome, Bryson DeChambeau said last year, “The U.S.G.A.’s going to have to go back on that one, like, ‘No! We made the hole bigger!’”

It sure has seemed that way to Scott, who ranked 165th on tour in 2018 in strokes-gained putting. Putting with the flagstick in the hole, he is ranked No. 26. “To be honest,” Scott said, “it almost changes the whole aim of the game. It’s to hit the pin, not hole the putt.”

He added, “It takes speed out of your head so much. It even takes some reading of the green out.”

DeChambeau has a point. The game’s governing bodies might be eager to simplify the rules, but their intent was never to make the game easier.

And in the end, have they really simplified anything?

When Scott looks at the remaining layers of rules as well as the lingering and newfound confusion, he, like Fowler, wonders how it is growing the game. Imagine picking up an unfamiliar board game, he said, and opening the box to find 84 pages of rules. Would you bother playing it?

Now picture the same game, with only five or six rules to learn to start out. Which version would you find more appealing?

“Let’s have all the rules on the back of the scorecard for people to get into the game of golf,” Scott said, adding, “And then as you get playing more you can maybe learn some finer points of this very complex game.”

Though Jay Monahan, the P.G.A. commissioner, said last week that he felt proud of how quickly and nimbly the alignment rule confusion was addressed, Scott disagreed.

“We haven’t had a lot of changes in golf in the history of the game , and we’ve had a lot recently — rules changing weekly in some cases — and it’s crazy,” Scott said.

He added, “I think we’re becoming the laughingstock.”

An earlier version of this article misstated the number of strokes Rickie Fowler was penalized for hitting a ball into the water during the Phoenix Open. It was one stroke, not two.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, GA — Tommy Fleetwood may already be one of golf's most recognizable players but the mop-topped Englishman is determined to be marked out as winner rather than for a great head of hair.

Looking more like a member of Hall of Fame rock band Fleetwood Mac than the PGA Tour, the 28-year-old, with his scruffy beard and long locks spilling out from under a baseball cap, was easily distinguishable from the cookie cutter golfing crowd getting in some practice on Monday at Augusta National ahead of the Masters.

Considering Fleetwood's PGA Tour resume does not yet include a title, he would not have drawn much attention had it not been for his "better to burn out than fade away" approach to tournament play which has amplified his rocker image.

That "all in" attitude was on full display during the final round of the Players Championship last month when he was trailing Rory McIlroy by two strokes with two holes to play. Fleetwood attacked the pin on the infamous 17th island green and paid the price as his title hopes ended in a watery grave.

"I don't know why people would expect me to play for the middle of the green if I had a chance of catching Rory," Fleetwood told reporters. "Maybe that's my difference than some other people, I'm always going to play to win.

"Not that golf will ever define me as a person but I'm never going to look back on my career and say, oh, I finished third at the Players, that was a good week. Or, oh, I finished top five at the Masters, I made a couple of nice pars on the last to finish top five. 

"That's probably something I'll never say to my kids or grandkids. That's not something to be that proud of.

"Winning is what it's all about."

While Fleetwood is still chasing a maiden PGA Tour title, he does know his way to the winner's circle with four victories on the European Tour.

He has regularly featured on the leaderboard at majors, including a runner-up finish at last year's U.S. Open and has shown good form this season with three top 10s.

More importantly Fleetwood believes his Masters apprenticeship has reached the point where he can fight for a green jacket.

After missing the cut in his first visit to Augusta in 2017, Fleetwood improved to a 17th place finish last year. He showed signs that he was getting comfortable with the layout after carding a six-under 66 in the third round.

"Year one, it's all so new," said Fleetwood. "Year two, you've been here already, so you're more comfortable with it and it just kind of progresses. 

"There's a different atmosphere.

"It's the first major of the year and ... everything that's happened before just doesn't really matter.

"You know, this is it."

 (Editing by Pritha Sarkar)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, GA — Tommy Fleetwood may already be one of golf's most recognisable players but the mop-topped Englishman is determined to be marked out as winner rather than for a great head of hair.

Looking more like a member of Hall of Fame rock band Fleetwood Mac than the PGA Tour, the 28-year-old, with his scruffy beard and long locks spilling out from under a baseball cap, was easily distinguishable from the cookie cutter golfing crowd getting in some practice on Monday at Augusta National ahead of the Masters.

Considering Fleetwood's PGA Tour resume does not yet include a title, he would not have drawn much attention had it not been for his "better to burn out than fade away" approach to tournament play which has amplified his rocker image.

That "all in" attitude was on full display during the final round of the Players Championship last month when he was trailing Rory McIlroy by two strokes with two holes to play. Fleetwood attacked the pin on the infamous 17th island green and paid the price as his title hopes ended in a watery grave.

"I don't know why people would expect me to play for the middle of the green if I had a chance of catching Rory," Fleetwood told reporters. "Maybe that's my difference than some other people, I'm always going to play to win.

"Not that golf will ever define me as a person but I'm never going to look back on my career and say, oh, I finished third at the Players, that was a good week. Or, oh, I finished top five at the Masters, I made a couple of nice pars on the last to finish top five. 

"That's probably something I'll never say to my kids or grandkids. That's not something to be that proud of.

"Winning is what it's all about."

While Fleetwood is still chasing a maiden PGA Tour title, he does know his way to the winner's circle with four victories on the European Tour.

He has regularly featured on the leaderboard at majors, including a runner-up finish at last year's U.S. Open and has shown good form this season with three top 10s.

More importantly Fleetwood believes his Masters apprenticeship has reached the point where he can fight for a green jacket.

After missing the cut in his first visit to Augusta in 2017, Fleetwood improved to a 17th place finish last year. He showed signs that he was getting comfortable with the layout after carding a six-under 66 in the third round.

"Year one, it's all so new," said Fleetwood. "Year two, you've been here already, so you're more comfortable with it and it just kind of progresses. 

"There's a different atmosphere.

"It's the first major of the year and ... everything that's happened before just doesn't really matter.

"You know, this is it."

 (Editing by Pritha Sarkar)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Jordan Spieth visited the Augusta National media interview room almost unnoticed for his assigned rendezvous with the press on Tuesday, like a guest invited to make up the numbers.

Only a handful of journalists bothered turning up to hear what the 2015 Masters champion had to say, a far cry from the not-so-long ago days when he packed out the house, seemingly destined to become an all-time great.

Though Spieth is only 25, and time is still on his side, his star has waned considerably since he captured the 2017 British Open, his third major title, leaving him only a PGA Championship short of the career grand slam of all four modern majors.

He became the second player after Jack Nicklaus to complete three legs of the slam before the age of 24, rarefied company to be sure.

Spieth almost pulled off a comeback for the ages in the final round last year, storming from nine strokes behind Patrick Reed to finish third with a closing 64.

But Spieth has regressed since then, so much so that a tie for 30th at the Texas Open on Sunday was his best stroke play result all year.

But he struck an upbeat note on Tuesday as he assessed his chances this week.

"My expectations are high," he said. 

"I feel great about the state of my game right now. I feel like my recent results aren't a tell of where my game is actually at, and I feel I've made a lot of strides in the last couple of days in the tee-to-green game.

"Really just off the tee, my long game has been the only separation from being able to win golf tournaments over the last month or so." 

Not everyone is convinced.

"His golf swing has changed so much, it's almost been completely stripped of all its athleticism," Golf Channel analyst Brandel Chamblee said of Spieth in a conference call last week.

"His swing has completely changed, and it looks to me like he's in a very tough spot, and who knows if he'll ever find his way back.

"A lot of people who go down that road can't remember how to get back home."

That might sound a little bit negative but there are no more guarantees in golf than in any other walk of life.

Spieth of course was much more optimistic.

"I feel really good about my game, where it's at, heading into this week," he said.

"It's just a matter of trust in the stuff that I'm working on... I don't feel like there's any added pressure this week. 

"I feel kind of under the radar, which is really nice. That changes day-to-day out here though."

 (Reporting by Andrew Both; Editing by Ken Ferris)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Augusta National chairman Fred Ridley on Wednesday threw cold water on the idea of one day hosting a women's Masters alongside the men's major.

Augusta National, which did not have a woman member until seven years ago, held its first women's tournament last week on the same course that will play host to the men's major.

Ridley, however, said the club has no plans to take another step and develop a women's Masters.

"To date, all of our grow-the-game initiatives have been focused on amateur golf and amateur golfers," said Ridley during the Augusta National chairman's annual address on Wednesday. 

"In this particular case, we elected to conduct a women's amateur tournament for really that same reason, but we really wanted this to continue in a grow-the-game sort of mode.

"As to what we might do next, I'm still thinking about last Saturday, so I'll start thinking about that next week."

For many the next logical step is for Augusta to organize a women's Masters. The idea, however, does not seem to excite the Augusta membership.

While Augusta National is best known as the home of the Masters, Ridley believes the club is better serving the amateur roots of co-founders Clifford Roberts and Bobby Jones and developing the sport by giving its name to a women's amateur competition.

"I think part of that kind of goes back to history and that is that Augusta National was founded, co-founded by the greatest amateur of all time," said Ridley. 

After opening its doors to women members in 2012, Augusta National has since made efforts to promote and develop women's golf, but some in the game remain frustrated by what they see as the painfully slow pace of change.

Asked if the club's failure to confront its restrictive policies had stunted the growth of the women's game, Ridley said they could have done better. 

"No matter what the issue is, you know, we can always look back and say we could do better," said Ridley. "No question. 

"But what my focus is, is on the future and where we are now and where we want to go. We learn from the past. 

"But what I think is most productive is to look at where we are today, realize that throughout the history of this club, we have promoted the game and we have now identified a really important segment, the fastest growing segment of the game - that we can help make a difference."

 (Editing by Toby Davis)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — It has been 11 years since Tiger Woods last won a major and 14 since he claimed a Green Jacket yet like Augusta National itself some things never seem to change as the 43 year-old again took his place in the Masters spotlight on Tuesday.

"If Tiger wins my goodness what's that story going to be, it might make the morning papers -- for the next three months," six-time major winner Nick Faldo replied when asked what might be the Masters' biggest storylines when play begins.

Since Woods made his Masters debut in 1995 until a rainy practice round on Tuesday, the American has been the main attraction at the year's first major.

Even when Woods was not at Augusta National, missing the 2014, 2016 and 2017 tournaments due to injury, he was never out of the Masters conversation.

Without a major win since notching number 14 at the 2008 U.S. Open, Woods's Masters drought stretches back even further to 2005 before either of his children, 11 year-old Sam and 10 year-old Charlie, were born.

For golf fans it is a dry spell that is hard to comprehend and for Woods one he admits he never saw coming. 

"I would say that I wouldn't have foreseen that, for sure," said Woods. "After I won my 14th, I felt like I still had plenty more major championships that I could win, but unfortunately I just didn't do it.

"Hopefully this year, I put myself there again, and hopefully I'll get it done."

PROMISING SIGNS

As Thursday's first round approaches Tiger-mania is picking up steam.

After successful back fusion surgery and a long tedious recovery Woods returned to the winner's circle last year, picking up his 80th career title with a stunning victory at the Tour Championship.

Perhaps an even more promising sign of a major breakthrough came at last year's British Open and PGA Championship where he contended in both events.

"It proved to me that I could win again," Woods said of his Tour Championship victory. "You know, I was close a couple of times. 

"I just need to clean up my rounds and maybe need to get a break here or there."

Nowhere does the Tiger mystique hang over an event more than at the Masters.

Augusta National has long been a happy place for Woods who along with his four wins has been runner-up twice with a third and three fourth-place finishes.

"I know that I can play this golf course," he said. "I've had some success here. This is unlike any other golf tournament. The golf course is special. 

"The tournament does an incredible job of creating a special atmosphere but it's also the patrons and how you can tell birdie roars and eagle roars. It's neat to hear.

"I've felt it and it's exciting to be part of and hopefully I can be part of it come Sunday night."

 (Editing by Ken Ferris)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

(Reuters) - Dutchman Daan Huizing made nine birdies to take the lead in the first round of the Jordan Mixed Open, the first professional tournament with men and women competing against each other for the same prize, on Thursday. 

Huizing shot an eight-under 64 in Aqaba to lead England's Meghan MacLaren, a Ladies European Tour winner, and her compatriot Jack Senior by one stroke.

Forty professionals and one amateur player each from the Challenge Tour, the over-50s Tour and the Ladies European Tour are in the field, competing for a prize fund of around $400,000.

"Today was pretty complete and I was shaping the ball nicely, both ways, which is something I've worked on very hard over the winter," Huizing told reporters.

"I made some good putts and mentally I was in good shape as well, sticking to my process, so there are a lot of good signs and I'm looking forward to tomorrow."

MacLaren, who sparked debate in January over the disparity in pay between men's and women's events, was happy to finish among the leaders after setting the early clubhouse target.

"If I'm going to write about it and talk about it all the time, then I better back it up with my golf," MacLaren, the only woman to finish in the top 10, said. "If I'm up there it means the girls can take advantage.

"I'm delighted to do it at this tournament because hopefully it will send a message. But any time you shoot seven under in any tournament you're not going to be too far off the lead."

The course was designed by Australian Greg Norman who was world number one for over 300 weeks in the 1980s and 1990s.

"To construct a format in which women and men compete together over the same course is an impressive feat," Norman said in a statement.

"There is no doubt that events that showcase golfing talent regardless of gender, such as the Jordan Mixed Open... are the future of the game."

The Challenge Tour players are playing from tees making up a 7,152-yard course, the seniors cover 6,601 yards and the women 6,139 yards.

"Our first and primary priority was to engineer a format that could showcase golfing talent regardless of gender," director of operations Chris White said.

"This not only means taking into consideration carry yardages, both off the tee and throughout the player's whole bag, but also the positioning of bunkers and hazards."

Although the Jordan tournament is the first, official mixed gender tournament, men and women have competed against each other previously, most notably at the Wendy's 3-Tour Challenge, a single-day event which ran from 1992-2013.

 (Reporting by Rohith Nair in Bengaluru, editing by Ed Osmond and Christian Radnedge)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA Ga. (Reuters) - Rory McIlroy's desire to complete his collection of golf's four majors with a win at this week's Masters has led the Northern Irishman to try a fresh approach, one that focuses on meditation and juggling.

McIlroy enters the year's first major as the hottest player on the planet and he credits his solid start to 2019 with a new attitude that is all about perspective, persistence and poise, or what he refers to as the three P's.

The new formula for McIlroy, who will play the opening two rounds this week with American Rickie Fowler and Australia's Cameron Smith, centres around meditation, juggling and mind training.

"Look, I'm not going to go and live with the monks for a couple months in Nepal, but just to be able to get your mind in the right place and be able to focus and to centre yourself," McIlroy told a news conference at Augusta National on Tuesday.

"It's 10 minutes a day. It's not as if I'm being consumed by it. But definitely something that has helped from time to time. Especially in situations where you need your mind to be right."

McIlroy has five consecutive top-10 finishes at the Masters yet his defining moment at Augusta National remains his final-round collapse in 2011 when he failed to close out the win despite entering the day with a four-shot lead.

But McIlroy, who has since gone on to win four times at golf's three other majors, has visions of becoming just the sixth person to complete the career grand slam and hopes his new approach will prove fruitful.

The 29-year-old Northern Irishman has a top-six finish in each of the six stroke play events he has played this year, including a triumph at the Players Championship where he meditated for 20 minutes ahead of the final round.

Early indications, therefore, are that McIlroy may be on the right path with his meditation and juggling.

"They mightn't be the right things for other people, but I think I've found a formula that works for me, and I'm ‑‑ you know, I'm going to persist with it and I'm going to stick to it," said McIlroy.

"It's helped me play some of the best golf of my career so far this year, and you know, hopefully that will continue."

When it comes to juggling, McIlroy described himself as a "rookie" who can only handle three balls at once.

"You know, maybe what resonates with me is isn't going to resonate with someone else, but I found what I feel is the best path forward for me and I've committed to it," McIlroy said.

McIlroy, who had another close call last year when he began the final round three shots behind eventual winner Patrick Reed, said the pressure he puts on himself at Augusta National compared to his previous appearances has changed.

"I would dearly love to win this tournament one day. If it doesn't happen this week, that's totally fine, I'll come back next year and have another crack at it," said McIlroy.

"But I'm happy with where everything is, body, mind, game."

 (Reporting by Frank Pingue; Editing by Toby Davis)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA Ga. (Reuters) - Rory McIlroy's desire to complete his collection of golf's four majors with a win at this week's Masters has led the Northern Irishman to try a fresh approach, one that focuses on meditation and juggling.

McIlroy enters the year's first major as the hottest player on the planet and he credits his solid start to 2019 with a new attitude that is all about perspective, persistence and poise, or what he refers to as the three P's.

The new formula for McIlroy, who will play the opening two rounds this week with American Rickie Fowler and Australia's Cameron Smith, centres around meditation, juggling and mind training.

"Look, I'm not going to go and live with the monks for a couple months in Nepal, but just to be able to get your mind in the right place and be able to focus and to centre yourself," McIlroy told a news conference at Augusta National on Tuesday.

"It's 10 minutes a day. It's not as if I'm being consumed by it. But definitely something that has helped from time to time. Especially in situations where you need your mind to be right."

McIlroy has five consecutive top-10 finishes at the Masters yet his defining moment at Augusta National remains his final-round collapse in 2011 when he failed to close out the win despite entering the day with a four-shot lead.

But McIlroy, who has since gone on to win four times at golf's three other majors, has visions of becoming just the sixth person to complete the career grand slam and hopes his new approach will prove fruitful.

The 29-year-old Northern Irishman has a top-six finish in each of the six stroke play events he has played this year, including a triumph at the Players Championship where he meditated for 20 minutes ahead of the final round.

Early indications, therefore, are that McIlroy may be on the right path with his meditation and juggling.

"They mightn't be the right things for other people, but I think I've found a formula that works for me, and I'm ‑‑ you know, I'm going to persist with it and I'm going to stick to it," said McIlroy.

"It's helped me play some of the best golf of my career so far this year, and you know, hopefully that will continue."

When it comes to juggling, McIlroy described himself as a "rookie" who can only handle three balls at once.

"You know, maybe what resonates with me is isn't going to resonate with someone else, but I found what I feel is the best path forward for me and I've committed to it," McIlroy said.

McIlroy, who had another close call last year when he began the final round three shots behind eventual winner Patrick Reed, said the pressure he puts on himself at Augusta National compared to his previous appearances has changed.

"I would dearly love to win this tournament one day. If it doesn't happen this week, that's totally fine, I'll come back next year and have another crack at it," said McIlroy.

"But I'm happy with where everything is, body, mind, game."

 (Reporting by Frank Pingue; Editing by Toby Davis)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA Ga. (Reuters) - Rickie Fowler returned to Augusta National on Monday with the heartbreak of last year's runner-up Masters finish firmly behind him and brimming with confidence that a breakthrough major win is closer than ever.

Fowler, a five-times winner on the PGA Tour, has three runner-up finishes to show from 36 major appearances and as a result finds his name on the list of the best players who have never won one of golf's four blue riband events.

But such talk does not discourage the 30-year-old American, who comes into the year's first major in solid form and among the favorites to claim a Green Jacket.

"Compared to four, five, whatever years ago, yeah, I'm more ready than I've ever been," Fowler told reporters. "Not saying that I can sit up here and tell you I'm definitely going to go win, but I like my chances.

"I love this place. I know I can play well around here. For me, every time I get to play it, it's fun ... I get to use my imagination around here." 

Last year Fowler started the final round at Augusta National five shots behind overnight leader Patrick Reed but a sparkling back nine, which included a birdie at the last, saw him card a five-under-par 67.

The strong finish was not enough as Reed managed to hang on for a one-stroke victory but Fowler, after getting over the pain of another near miss, was able to take plenty of positives from his performance.

"The way I executed on the back nine Sunday last year was definitely something I pull from, and it was a lot of fun to be in the mix, birdieing 18, to make Patrick earn it a bit," said Fowler.

"But I was just a little bit too far back, and Patrick put together a strong week of golf.

"So it was fun. It was great to be in the mix, and like I said, have a chance. But time to do one better."

Fowler's performance at last year's Masters also marked the first time in eight starts at Augusta National that he recorded four par or better rounds.

He has made a strong start to 2019, including a win at the Phoenix Open in February, and is fresh off a share of 17th place at the Valero Texas Open where Fowler said he ticked a lot of boxes when it came to having his golf game where he wanted it. 

"Some guys don't like to play (the week) before a major. Sometimes they like to get work in at home with their coach or work on the game and spend time on the driving range," said Fowler.

"For me, playing and just seeing where the state of my game's at and what I may need to work at makes Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday a lot more efficient. I know exactly what I want to do."

 (Editing by Ken Ferris)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

(Reuters) - Shane Lowry held on to his slender lead at the RBC Heritage on Friday though the Irishman still has two holes left to complete his second round after play was suspended for the day at the weather-hit South Carolina tournament.

Lowry was three-under par for the round when darkness halted play, leaving him on nine-under for the tournament, a stroke ahead of Trey Mullinax (68), who is already in the clubhouse on eight-under 134 at Harbour Town Golf Links.

Lowry, who opened with a 65, will return at 7:45 a.m. local time (1145 GMT) on Saturday to play the remaining two holes before beginning his third round.

Dustin Johnson and Argentine Emiliano Grillo shot matching 67s to finish on seven-under 135 before rain and high winds forced a suspension for nearly four hours.

Lowry collected birdies on his first two holes before the storms hit. He returned for two more birdies and a bogey.

Grillo had the highlight of the round after holing out from 254 yards for a two at the par-five fifth hole. It was the first albatross at the Hilton Head, South Carolina course since 2007 and the fourth of the year on the PGA Tour.

"It was a perfect shot," Grillo said. "Perfect distance. Perfect everything. Perfect wind. It was one of those that was good, but you never expect it to go in."

The Argentine also had three birdies after starting the round with two bogeys.

Johnson claimed five birdies against a single bogey.

"It was difficult all day," the world number one said. "The wind blew consistently all day. Made it tough. But I hit a lot of really solid golf shots. 

"At times it was really difficult to judge the wind but I felt like I played really solid all day, gave myself a lot of opportunities."

Johnson liked his weekend chances but hoped he could roll in a few more putts.

"The greens are tricky," he said. "For me, I don't know, I've always struggled reading them. But I hit some really nice putts and I played really solid."

Xander Schauffele, who had tied for second at the Masters, shot a 70 to sit eight strokes off the lead.

Italy's Francesco Molinari, who took a two-shot lead into the final round at Augusta National before being overtaken by Tiger Woods, was unlikely to make the projected cut of even par.

Molinari was at three-over with six holes to play in the second round.

 (Reporting by Gene Cherry in Salvo, North Carolina, editing by Peter Rutherford)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — The first time Francesco Molinari arrived at The Masters, he was in white overalls. This year, the British Open champion is hoping to walk away in a green jacket.

A caddie for his brother Edoardo in 2006, Molinari "carried the clubs and prayed that (Edoardo) was going to hit good shots," the Italian told reporters on Tuesday.

"We were very inexperienced at this level and just trying to make the most of those two days."

This year, the 36-year-old will hit the links as the Open Championship's victor and a legitimate threat to take The Masters' top prize.

"I've had a lot of success in the last few months, and I think that the important thing is that I don't have to let my guard down," Molinari said. 

"I still have to go through all the work and the process that got me to this point, and hopefully will get me even further forward in my career."

The world number seven has enjoyed a hot streak since becoming the first Italian professional golfer to win a major at the British Open in July, clinching the Ryder cup for Europe in September and winning the race to Dubai in November.

Most recently, the European Tour Golfer of the Year put on a putting master class to win March's Arnold Palmer Invitational.

"It's taken awhile, but obviously now success is coming quite often, and that's a nice feeling," Molinari said. "So I'll try to keep working to keep the success coming."

To do so this week he'll need to contend with Augusta National's famously challenging course, where his career best saw him tie for 19th in 2012. 

Alongside his competitors, he'll also grapple with a new fifth hole on the course.

"The second shot, obviously is longer, considerably longer," said Molinari, who practiced on the front nine on Monday. "I think that's going to be around a three‑club difference."

 (Reporting By Amy Tennery; Editing by Christian Radnedge)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

SPRAGUE, Conn. — A bobcat that attacked a golfer in Connecticut was beaten off by golf clubs before environmental police tracked it down and killed it, authorities said.

The bobcat attacked the golfer at about 8:30 a.m. Thursday on the Mohegan Sun Golf Course in the Baltic section of Sprague, according to a statement from the state Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.

General manager Philip Krick Jr. told The Day of New London a foursome was near a fairway bunker on the seventh hole when the cat jumped on one man's back. Krick and police said the man in his 60s and another golfer in his group used their clubs to beat the cat away.

Environmental police tracked the cat to a culvert and shot it. The bobcat is thought to be the same animal that attacked a horse stabled nearby earlier in the morning. The horse received lacerations to the neck and eye and was treated by a veterinarian.

The bobcat is being tested for rabies.

The golfer was taken to a Norwich hospital to be treated for scratches. His name was not made public.

Bobcats are common in Connecticut, but they tend to be secretive animals and attacks on humans are rare, state officials said. The last report of a bobcat attack in the state was in Bozrah in August 2014. That animal turned out to be rabid.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

SPRAGUE, Conn. — A bobcat that attacked a golfer in Connecticut shortly after scratching a horse has tested positive for rabies.

The bobcat was shot and killed by state environmental police shortly after it attacked a man Thursday on the Mohegan Sun Golf Course in Sprague, Connecticut.

The state Department of Energy and Environmental Protection said in a statement the wildcat was taken for testing at the UConn Medical Lab, which confirmed it has rabies.

The golfer and the horse's owner have been notified.

The golfer, a man in his 60s whose name was not made public, was treated at a hospital for scratches.

Bobcats are common in Connecticut, but attacks on humans are unusual. The last report of a bobcat attack on a human in the state was in Bozrah in August 2014.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Like many golf fans, one of Brooks Koepka's most vivid Masters moments involves three-times champion Phil Mickelson.

Pulling it up from deep inside his childhood memory banks, Koepka recalled in detail on Tuesday his meeting with Mickelson near the Augusta National parking lot two decades ago when a starry eyed kid with dreams of being a Masters winner one day cornered 'Lefty' for an autograph.

"He turned me down, (I am) probably about the only kid Phil's ever turned down," recalled Koepka with a chuckle. "He told me years later, I shouldn't have been in the parking lot so fair enough. 

"He doesn't remember. I mean, I can't believe he doesn't remember the first time he ever said no to a kid, signing an autograph.

"I told him, I think in 2014, I think we were playing a practice round at the British Open. I had to tell him. I was like, 'Listen, man, you stiffed me and I really didn't like you for a long time'.

"We can laugh about it now."

Fast forward 20 years and Koepka is a three-times major winner signing autographs at Augusta National -- the only hint of a scar left from the Mickelson brush-off is his difficulty in saying 'no' to a little kid.

Koepka said he has since got Mickelson's autograph and this week will be focused on getting his own name on the Masters trophy and slipping into a Green Jacket.

In each of his three previous Masters, the 28-year-old American has made progress but is still without a top-10, with his best finish a tie for 11th in 2017.

He watched last year's tournament from his couch recovering from a wrist injury. 

He returns to Augusta National as a far different player, having since won three majors, back-to-back U.S. Opens in 2017 and 2018 along with the 2018 PGA Championship.

"I've got three trophies that I haven't had any time I've teed it up (here)," said Koepka. "I've never been a major champion when I played here.

"Completely different player probably. (I) Understand how to handle pressure a lot better, understand this golf course a lot better. Even sitting out a year, there are certain things you can pick up on when you're watching.

"And (I have) really kind of matured on and off the golf course. I think it is a big deal."

"It's nice to be back here. It's always a special place to be playing."

 (Editing by Toby Davis)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

NEW YORK — In a story April 15, The Associated Press reported that Adidas sold off its golf business. The story should have clarified that the business Adidas sold off was a golf club maker, and that Adidas still offers golf apparel, footwear and accessories.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Jeff Shain



Though the Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship has been part of the European Tour schedule since 2006, this week’s 14th edition takes on heightened status as part of the Rolex Series collection of tournaments offering a prize fund of at least $7 million.

Under the new European Tour schedule that backloaded most of its top events into the late summer and fall, the Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship presented by EGA is the only Rolex Series event in the first half of the year.

It’s also the first European Tour event of any kind in 2019, as the circuit emerges from a four-week break after the South African Open and Alfred Dunhill Championship in December. Two more Middle East events follow with the Omega Dubai Desert Classic and the Saudi International.

The English pro, 27, and one of last year’s Ryder Cup heroes, seeks a third straight crown at Abu Dhabi, having emerged from a congested group on the final day two years ago and finishing two strokes clear of Ross Fisher in last year’s title defense.

It will be Fleetwood’s first start of 2019, hoping to resume a strong run in which he hasn’t finished lower than 16th in eight starts since early September. He followed up a 4-1 performance in Europe’s Ryder Cup triumph by placing runner-up at the Alfred Dunhill Links Championship and took third in the final Race to Dubai season standings.

The former world No. 1 makes his third consecutive visit to Abu Dhabi, sharing runner-up honors in 2017 and adding a tie for ninth last year. In both cases, he had to work his way back up the leader board after an opening 72.

Johnson, 34, arrives off a share of fourth at the PGA Tour’s Sentry Tournament of Champions in Hawaii, where a second-round 74 dropped him from among the front-runners. The round included the PGA Tour’s first penalty of 2019, when he played the wrong ball from a hazard after a marshal told him the ball was his.

“That won’t ever happen again,” Johnson told reporters.

Back at No. 2 in the world rankings in a seemingly perpetual flip-flop with Justin Rose, Koepka, 28, never got on track in Hawaii in his first start back from the holiday break. He broke 70 just once at the Tournament of Champions on the way to a share of 24th.

Koepka returns to Abu Dhabi for the first time since 2014. He made an early departure that year, shooting 77-73 to finish below the cut line. Now, though, he’ll try to live up to his billing as a three-time major winner.

The two-time major champion once ruled Abu Dhabi, winning three times in his first five appearances. He remains the event’s only three-time champion, but has been inconsistent since then, with three top-six finishes but also three outside the top 25.

Kaymer, 34, will tee it up for the first time since last year’s European Tour finale in Dubai, where he tied for 55th in a 60-man field. It was a frustrating 2018 all around for Kaymer, who sat out four weeks in the spring with wrist problems and missed 12 cuts in 23 starts worldwide upon his return.

An emotional victory at his native South African Open helped bring Oosthuizen’s 2018 to a satisfying close, separating himself on the final day to become just the sixth man to put his name on both the Open trophy and the British Open’s Claret Jug.

Oosthuizen, 36, also tied for seventh a week later at the Alfred Dunhill Championship, giving him four top-10 finishes worldwide in his final five starts of the year. He’s played Abu Dhabi before, earning a share of second in 2009 behind Paul Casey, but this is his first visit since 2011.

The 45-year-old Englishman showed he’s still a factor by winning the Nedbank Challenge last November, out dueling Oosthuizen and Sergio Garcia on the final day to end a three-and-a-half-year victory drought that was his longest since a career slump in the mid-2000s. It was his 24th European Tour win.

Westwood shared runner-up honors in his 2008 debut at Abu Dhabi, but with just one top-15 finish there since. Over the past three years, he’s sandwiched a tie for eighth in 2017 between a pair of missed cuts.

One of just a handful of players who have competed every year since the tournament began, Stenson nonetheless remains in quest of his first victory at Abu Dhabi Golf Club. In fact, until last year’s debut of the NBO Oman Open it was the only Middle East event that Stenson hasn’t won.

Once a part-time resident of Dubai, Stenson, 42, has twice captured the tour’s season finale there, along with the 2007 Dubai Desert Classic and the 2006 Commercialbank Qatar Masters. He was runner-up in two of the first three years at Abu Dhabi, then didn’t have another top-10 until a tie for third in 2016.

The 28-year-old Englishman is tasked with following up a three-win season in 2018, which eventually left him 10th in the Race to Dubai standings. That fueled a rise from No. 130 in the world rankings to start last year into the top 50, earning his first Masters invitation.

It’s been an abrupt rise for Wallace, who first started to gain attention three years ago when he won six times on the developmental Alps Tour. That helped secure a place on Europe’s Challenge Tour, where a victory at the 2017 Portugal Open earned a promotion to the big circuit. Over the final five months of last year, he posted seven top-20 finishes in 13 starts.

Back woes ended Pepperell’s breakthrough 2018 on a sour note, managing just one round over the final two and a half months when he withdrew after one day of the tour’s season finale in Dubai. Before that, he hadn’t teed it up since winning the Sky Sports British Masters in October.

The 27-year-old Englishman also won the Commercial Bank Qatar Masters last spring and added runner-up finishes at the Portugal Masters and Aberdeen Standard Investments Scottish Open. That vaulted him into the top 40 of the world rankings for the first time, bringing a first Masters invitation to brighten his December.

Europe’s victorious Ryder Cup captain makes his fifth start since picking up his playing career after September’s Paris triumph. How he performs, though, figures to take a back seat in the conversation to the new piece of body art he likely won’t be showing off.

Making good on a promise to his players, Bjorn, 47, now has a small image of the Ryder Cup tattooed on his backside along with the 17½ to 10½ final score. While universally applauded by his players, most thought it wasn’t big enough. “He’s got plenty of space,” Ian Poulter quipped.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Golf

By Karen Crouse

RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. — Albane Valenzuela could have been teeing it up Wednesday in the inaugural Augusta National Women’s Amateur, where the contestants who survive the cut will play the final 18 holes on the fabled course where men will compete at the Masters next week.

Valenzuela, a junior at Stanford and the fifth-ranked women’s amateur in the world, seriously entertained the invitation from the board of governors of the Augusta National Golf Club until she received what she considered a better offer for this week: her third start in the ANA Inspiration, the women’s first major of the year.

“Getting to tee off and play the same course as the world No. 1,” she said Tuesday, referring to South Korea’s Sung Hyun Park, “I think that’s the best experience you can get.”

Augusta National officials have trumpeted their amateur invitational as a grand stage for women’s golf. That overlooks the major originally known as the Dinah Shore, which has captivated young golfers since 1972. The tournament has cultivated indelible traditions like the winner’s leap into Poppie’s Pond and consistently provided significant exposure for top amateurs like Valenzuela, who used her 2016 debut here as a springboard to the Rio Olympics.

Augusta National didn’t admit its first female members until 2012. And while it has since opened its course to boys and girls through the Drive, Chip and Putt contest and to amateur women, these inclusive gestures have ignored — and however unintentionally, undermined — the L.P.G.A., one of the longest-running women’s professional sports organizations.

The Drive, Chip and Putt contest, held the Sunday before the Masters, has siphoned television and other media coverage from the final round of the ANA Inspiration. And with the advent of the Augusta National Women’s Amateur, the spotlight on the best women’s players in the world has become more diffuse.

“I think it comes from a very positive place in Augusta — they want to do the right thing,” Valenzuela said. “It’s probably not my place to say, but it would have been great if both could have worked together to make them happen in different weeks, because you don’t want to get the spotlight off the L.P.G.A.”

The ANA Inspiration matters because the magnetic moments that attracted Valenzuela to the sport as a child didn’t involve Augusta National, which for most of its history has been so far out of the women’s orbit that it might as well have been on Mars.

“Ever since I’ve been a little girl I’ve seen all the girls jump in the pond,” Valenzuela said, adding, “This is the women’s Masters.”

On Wednesday, Jennifer Kupcho, a Wake Forest senior and the top-ranked women’s amateur, struck the opening drive of the new event at the Champions Retreat resort in Evans, Ga., the site of the first two rounds. Only the final round will be played at Augusta National.

Across the country Wednesday, Valenzuela grooved her swing on the Mission Hills practice range. Stacy Lewis, the 2011 ANA Inspiration champion, said she planned to extend a warm welcome to Valenzuela and the four other amateurs in the field: Patty Tavatanakit, Frida Kinhult, Rachel Heck and Xin Kou, who is also known as Cindy.

“I’m really proud of them,” said Lewis, the former women’s world No. 1 who recently returned to competition after the birth in October of her first child, a daughter. “If you want to play professional golf, you need to play in majors, and you need to see where your game stacks up and have that experience of playing in front of those big crowds.”

Valenzuela has advanced to the weekend in each of her previous starts in this event. If she misses the cut this week, she will not be idle over the weekend. Her consolation prize will be joining her Stanford teammates on Sunday at the Silverado Showdown, a collegiate women’s event in Napa.

Stanford is ranked fourth in the Women’s Golf Coaches Association poll and is jockeying with other top teams for seeding positions at next month’s N.C.A.A. championship. Another Stanford star, Andrea Lee, chose to play in Georgia this week.

Anne Walker, Valenzuela’s coach at Stanford, said in a telephone interview that she welcomed Augusta National’s move into the women’s game, describing it as “another great opportunity that’s opened up.”

But in its exuberance to grow the game, Augusta National big-footed more than the L.P.G.A. schedule. “There’s very little discussion about the timing of it as it relates to college golf,” Walker said.

She pointed out that Texas, which is ranked second behind the University of Southern California, competed in the Bruzzy Challenge this week in Texas without three of its top players: Emilee Hoffman, Agathe Laisne and Kaitlyn Papp, who are in Augusta. The Longhorns finished tied for seventh, their lowest finish of the season by three places.

Walker ultimately described the scheduling conflicts as “a great problem to have.”

But they are a problem, nonetheless.

When the Augusta National chairman, Fred Ridley, announced the new event last year, he said: “We think that to have one week where the future greats of the game and the current greats of the women’s game are all competing on a big stage is, it’s just very exciting.”

Referring to L.P.G.A. Commissioner Mike Whan, who was not consulted before the Augusta tournament was scheduled, Ridley added, “I think he also understands that in time it’s going to be a win for the L.P.G.A.”

Lewis said she would love to see the Augusta event played at a different time of year.

Referring to the amateurs, she added, “Maybe they could get a full tournament on Augusta National. Get a couple practice rounds and a three-round tournament there.”

Or better yet, the Augusta National members could find a way to welcome the 8-year-old girls and the 18-year-old amateurs after they have grown into the best women players on the planet.

It’s a win-win for golf any time the best women mix with the best men, as Brittany Lincicome, a two-time ANA Inspiration champion, recently was reminded.

Lincicome spent two days last month at the PGA Tour’s flagship event in Florida, and she was shocked when players like Sergio Garcia and Rory McIlroy saw her behind the rope lines and came bounding over to ask if she would pose for selfies with them.

Lincicome, 33, has been slow to recognize that her start last year in a PGA Tour event in Kentucky trumped either of her victorious finishes here.

“I had no idea they knew who I was,” she said.

If the L.P.G.A. has to move the date of its first major to accommodate Augusta National, here’s one idea how Augusta National members could make the change palatable. They could extend an invitation to the women’s reigning major winners to compete alongside the men in the Masters’ par-3 contest. That would be more meaningful start than a flashy 18-hole finish to an amateur event.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Richard Goldstein

Alice Dye, who teamed with her husband, Pete, to pioneer modern golf-course architecture and worked to promote the women’s game for more than half a century, died on Friday in Gulf Stream, Fla. She was 91.

Her death was announced by Dye Designs, the family’s company.

The Dyes designed dozens of venues, in the United States and abroad, many of them regularly ranked among the best in the world and frequently chosen to host professional tournaments.

That roster includes the stadium course at TPC Sawgrass, in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla.; PGA West, near Palm Springs, Calif.; Whistling Straits, on Lake Michigan in Sheboygan, Wis.; the Ocean Course, on Kiawah Island in South Carolina; Harbour Town Golf Links, in Hilton Head, S.C.; and Crooked Stick, in Alice’s hometown, Indianapolis.

Their courses were generally known as Pete Dye designs, but Alice provided significant input, and her husband usually took her advice.

Their signature hole was the 17th at TPC Sawgrass, the home of the Players Championship. When Pete was unsure how to fill in sandy terrain he had hollowed out around the green for transfer to other spots on the course, Alice provided the solution.

“Originally, the water was just supposed to come into play on the right side, but we just kept digging,” the Golf Channel quoted Mr. Dye as saying. “And then one day Alice came out and said, ‘Why don’t you just go ahead and make it an island?’ So we did.”

That green, connected to the rest of the course by a slender land bridge, has tormented even the world’s greatest golfers and become one of the most recognized images in the sport.

When they were building the Ocean Course on Kiawah Island in 1990, Ms. Dye persuaded her husband to raise the fairways to harmonize them with the environment.

“Pete, I can’t see the ocean on the back nine,” she said, as related by The New York Times. “I don’t just want to hear it; I want to see it.”

Mr. Dye raised the fairways by six feet so that the ocean came into view. But that created an added challenge by exposing the course to unpredictable, sometimes strong winds.

Both husband and wife were avid golfers, but Ms. Dye was the more accomplished of the two; she won some 50 amateur titles as well as two United States Golf Association senior championships and two Canadian senior championships. She played on the United States’ victorious Curtis Cup team in 1970.

In 1983, Ms. Dye was the first woman admitted to the American Society of Golf Course Architects. In 1997, she became the first woman to serve as the society’s president. She received the PGA of America’s First Lady of Golf Award in 2004.

Ms. Dye championed forward tees that make formidable courses more playable for most women as well as for male players outside the pro ranks.

“I worked very hard on trying to get the two-tee system for women,” she told the PGA of America. “I was successful in getting the yardage down between 5,000 and 5,200 yards.”

“We’re total opposites,” Ms. Dye said when she and Mr. Dye were interviewed by PBS in 2012. “He’s artistic and I’m the practical one.”

On her death, Ron Whitten wrote in Golf Digest: “She was the more successful competitive golfer, with a supple swing. She was a better politician than Pete when it came to dealing with owners and regulators, more polished in presentations and communications. As a golf architect, she was the more knowledgeable of the two, teaching Pete how to read contour maps and handling most of his drawings.”

In his memoir, “Bury Me in a Pot Bunker” (1995, with Mark Shaw), Pete Dye wrote of his wife, “She may have taken a back seat to whatever publicity I’ve had over the last 30 years, but everyone in the golf industry knows how important her contributions have been, since she has such an intuition for what makes a golf course challenging but playable.”

Alice O’Neal was born in Indianapolis on Feb. 19, 1927, to Perry and Lucy (Holliday) O’Neal. Her father, a corporate lawyer, was an avid golfer.

Alice developed her smooth swing at a local country club junior class and began winning tournaments as a teenager.

She met Mr. Dye when they were students at Rollins College, in Winter Park, Fla., where she was captain of the women’s golf team and also played on the men’s squad along with Pete. Alice graduated in 1948, but Pete dropped out. They were married in 1950 and settled in Indianapolis.

The couple were selling insurance there in the mid-1950s when they decided to pursue golf-course design. They advanced their knowledge of the profession when they toured Britain in 1963 and visited numerous courses.

Alice Dye is survived by her husband; their sons, Perry and Paul Burke (known as P.B.) Dye; two grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren. Both sons are golf architects with Dye Designs.

Ms. Dye looked back on her career in a book of her own, “From Birdies to Bunkers: Discover How Golf Can Bring Love, Humor, and Success Into Your Life” (2004), also written with Mr. Shaw.

Into her 80s, she offered insights for women who play golf.

“Because they have to tee off last on so many holes, a lot of women get self-conscious and worry that everyone is analyzing or judging their golf swing,” she told The Times in 2012. “That’s not true. They might be looking at their shoes or their hat. Most men don’t know enough about the golf swing to analyze it.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Iliana Magra

LONDON — President Trump has implied that a golf course owned by the Trump Organization in Scotland helps cement the United States’ relationship with Britain, just a few days after a Scottish court ruled that the company had to pay expenses in a failed lawsuit.

“Very proud of perhaps the greatest golf course anywhere in the world,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter on Saturday, adding, “Also, furthers U.K. relationship!”

Very proud of perhaps the greatest golf course anywhere in the world. Also, furthers U.K. relationship! https://t.co/3xTzzJH6Iq

The Trump International golf course near Aberdeen, in northeastern Scotland, was ordered on Wednesday to cover the Scottish government’s legal costs after the company was unsuccessful in its attempts to halt a North Sea wind power development.

Mr. Trump’s company had argued that the wind turbines would mar the view from the golf course. The case went to the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in December 2015, where the company lost, setting up the ruling about who should pay costs.

The exact sum of the reimbursement that the Trump Organization now has to pay has not been disclosed. The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

The president’s tweet prompted bafflement and concern among some legal and ethics experts.

Thomas Lundmark, a professor of law at the University of Hull, in northern England, said in a telephone interview on Monday that the tweet “made me curious.”

“I don’t know what he’s talking about,” Mr. Lundmark added. “Does it further a relationship for him? For the United States? For us? How?”

Though the ruling in Scotland was against Mr. Trump’s company, Mr. Lundmark suggested that there were constitutional and ethical concerns.

The American Constitution prohibits the president from accepting payments from foreign and domestic governments. Mr. Trump owns golf courses, hotels and other properties that are frequented by foreign and domestic government officials.

Some have claimed that Mr. Trump’s promotion of his properties while president amount to a violation of the emoluments clauses in the Constitution.

“He’s turned companies over to other people to manage, but he is still a beneficiary,” Mr. Lundmark said.

John Linarelli, an American professor of commercial law at Durham University in northeast England, said that there was “plausible concern” that the constitutional rules were being violated.

It was also, he added, “a question of ethics.”

“You want him to have our interests in mind when he’s managing foreign policy — not his own,” Mr. Linarelli added.

Walter M. Shaub Jr., who resigned his post as the United States government’s top ethics watchdog in July 2017, said in a tweet on Saturday that Mr. Trump’s comment was the president’s “most explicit commingling of personal interests and public office to date.”

“This is shameless, corrupt and repugnant presidential profiteering,” he added. “This is an invitation to graft.”

Mr. Shaub is now a senior adviser for Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, a nonprofit advocacy group.

The group sued Mr. Trump in January 2017, arguing that he was “illegally receiving payments from foreign governments.” The lawsuit cleared a hurdle last March when a federal judge in Maryland refused the Justice Department’s request to dismiss it.

In July, another lawsuit accusing the president of violating the Constitution by maintaining a financial interest in his company’s Washington hotel was allowed to move to the evidence-gathering stage.

Follow Iliana Magra on Twitter: @Magraki. 









Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA Ga. (Reuters) - Rory McIlroy will begin his latest quest to complete the career grand slam of golf's four majors when he tees off alongside American Rickie Fowler and Australia's Cameron Smith at the Masters starting on Thursday at Augusta National.

It will be McIlroy's fifth attempt at the Masters to complete his collection of major titles and is perhaps his best chance yet as the Northern Irishman enters the week as the hottest player on the planet.

McIlroy's grouping, which will be the 15th of 29 to take the course, will start their round at 11:15 a.m. ET (1515 GMT) and follow the threesome of four-times champion Tiger Woods, China's Li Haotong and Spaniard Jon Rahm around the course.

Looking to join Gene Sarazen, Ben Hogan, Gary Player, Jack Nicklaus and Woods as winners of the career grand slam, McIlroy enters the year's first major in top form.

With a top-six finish in each of the six stroke play events he has played this year, including a triumph at The Players Championship three weeks ago, McIlroy is a popular pick to make amends for his final-round letdown last year.

McIlroy, whose grouping will be the last out on Friday at 2 p.m. ET behind the Woods threesome, started three shots back of eventual champion Patrick Reed entering the final round in 2018 but closed with two-over 74 to finish in a share of fifth place.

Three-times champion Phil Mickelson will play the opening two rounds alongside 2013 U.S. Open champion Justin Rose and 2017 PGA Championship winner Justin Thomas in the penultimate grouping on Thursday.

The final trio on Thursday will bring together Jordan Spieth, Paul Casey and Brooks Koepka.

World number two Dustin Johnson will play the opening two rounds with Bryson DeChambeau and Australian Jason Day while reigning champion Patrick Reed will play alongside fellow American Webb Simpson and Norwegian amateur Viktor Hovland.

 (Reporting by Frank Pingue)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA Ga. (Reuters) - Bryson DeChambeau has earned the "mad scientist" nickname for his calculated approach to golf and may need to spend some extra time in his quirky laboratory to find a winning formula at this week's Masters.

DeChambeau, a physics major who previously used a since-banned compass to help read greens, has five wins on the PGA Tour but taming Augusta National will prove the toughest test yet for the American world number six.

The year's first major does not provide players with green-reading books, and that could put DeChambeau well out of his comfort zone given the highly-contoured greens at Augusta National that can frustrate the game's best putters.

"I have to work a little harder to get some insight into some things than other places, but that's fine," DeChambeau told reporters on Monday.

"I mean, that's a part of the process, and I think the person who digs it out of the dirt the most should have a little bit of an advantage and I think that's where it's actually a positive thing."

DeChambeau, who finished as the low amateur at the Masters in 2016 before joining the PGA Tour the following year, already has a win this season but knows he faces a difficult challenge going into Thursday's opening round.

Unlike many of his competitors, DeChambeau will not be able to rely on the detailed notes they have modified over the years after logging countless practice and tournament rounds at Augusta National.

DeChambeau made no secrets when asked about what impact the lack of green-reading books could have on him this week.

"Now I practiced trying to understand what one percent is, what two percent is, based on my eyes," said DeChambeau. "Is it as precise as the greens books? Absolutely not. We still have to feel and sense with our eyes what it's going to do.

"That's really all I can do and I have to practice a lot more hitting breaking putts, because I can't just bring out my compass and go, oh, it's 3 percent and here it is. I have to look at and walk around and go, okay, I'm acclimated to 3 percent."

 (Reporting by Frank Pingue, editing by Pritha Sarkar)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Phil Mickelson flashed the faraway look of a man approaching a half-century of life, clearly pondering where the time went.

"It goes by fast," he reminisced, glancing toward the rolling hills and towering pines beyond the Augusta National clubhouse.

Then, just like that, Lefty snapped out of it.

He's got his sights on a fourth green jacket.

"I think I've got another major in me," Mickelson said confidently. "At least one, maybe two. I would love to get one right here."

The 100th round of his Masters career wasn't all that memorable, a middling 1-over 73 Friday in which he was forced to scramble mightily to overcome a wayward driver.

But it was enough to keep him in the thick of things after an opening-round 67, to give him a shot at becoming the oldest player to win one of golf's major championships.

For a sport that can be a bit lethargic, needlessly complicated and way too stuffy, this remains one of its overwhelming charms.

On any given day, the old guys can still go swing-for-swing with all those buffed-up youngsters, giving us all a bit of hope as we approach middle age and beyond, clear evidence that our golden years don't have to be confined to a rocking chair.

That's especially the case at Augusta National, which embraces the geezers like a warm, comfy blanket.

"Every time I come here, I just feel like a kid again," Mickelson said. "It's so much fun."

He's already got one major title since entering his 40s, capturing the 2013 British Open at age 43. Now, with his 49th birthday a little over two months away, there's little doubt that he's still got the game to win another.

"I expected to be a little bit better, to be honest," said Mickelson, whose 4-under 140 left him three shots off the lead. "But there's nothing better than having a chance going into the weekend at the Masters, and that's what I want to focus on. I know that I'm playing well enough."

As with all sports, golf will always be a young man's game.

A player is far more likely to win a major title in his 20s than his 40s.

But there's a good three dozen members of the Over-40 Major Champions Club, and it seems only a matter of time before someone in their 50s break through to win one of the biggest events.

For now, the oldest to do it was Julius Boros, at the PGA Championship way back in 1968, when he was about four months past his 48th birthday. But Tom Watson very nearly captured the 2009 British Open at age 59, squandering a lead with a bogey on the 72nd hole and losing to Stewart Cink in a four-hole playoff.

Mickelson already has a victory this season and it's not at all far-fetched to envision him contending for a few more championships after he turns 49 on June 16 — which just happens to be the same day as the final round of the U.S. Open at Pebble Beach, site of his most recent triumph a mere two months ago.

The Masters leaderboard also included a pair of 43-year-olds, Tiger Woods and Ian Poulter. But, really, the most impressive performance of the first two days was turned in by Bernhard Langer, the 61-year-old German who is graying at the edges but still looks as fit as he did in his prime.

Langer isn't going to win the tournament. But he easily made the cut, cruising around the course he knows so well with rounds of 71 and 72. He can't hit it as far as those players half as age (and then some), but he knows each nook and cranny of the course, the sort of local knowledge that goes far at a place such as this.

Not that he'd turn down a dip in the fountain of youth.

"I'm hitting a 4-iron and (younger players are) hitting a 9-iron," Langer quipped. "I would rather hit a 9-iron and have a little less experience."

He closed out Friday's round with three birdies on the last five holes, putting him one shot ahead of 25-year-old Jordan Spieth and ensuring he would finish above the cut line for the fifth time in the last seven years.

But Father Time will catch him one of these days.

Just ask Ian Woosnam, the diminutive Welshman who won the Masters in 1991, the same year Mickelson made his Augusta debut as an amateur from Arizona State.

Sharing Langer's age but plagued by a bad back, Woosnam is no match for this course. Hasn't been for the better part of two decades. He wanted to quit a few years ago, but his spouse wouldn't let him.

"I got a telling off from my wife," Woosnam joked. "She said, 'Get out there and do it again."

But Friday's round was his last at Augusta National.

If Woosnam comes back again, it will just be for fun. After rounds of 80 and 76 — and missing the cut for the 11th year in a row — he announced his Masters retirement as soon as he walked off the 18th green.

"It doesn't seem to get any better," Woosnam said, in words that everyone can relate to with the passing of the years. "Maybe if they will give me a cart or something like that, I'll come back. That would be all right. But I don't think I'll get that."

Woosnam savored the laughs and the memories.

This part of his journey was done.

In the end, the years always win.

But in golf, sometimes, it takes them longer to catch you.

___

Paul Newberry is a sports columnist for The Associated Press. Write to him at pnewberry@ap.org or at www.twitter.com/pnewberry1963 His work can be found at https://apnews.com/search/paul%20newberry

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA Ga. (Reuters) - Brooks Koepka was all brawn in the first round of the Masters but on Friday he was all brains as he showcased his mental toughness on a day when it looked like he might drop out of contention.

A day following a flawless trip around Augusta National, overnight leader Koepka was forced to battle through ups-and-downs en route to a one-under-par 71 that left him in a five-way share of a one-shot lead after the second round.

"I'm proud of myself the way I hung in there," said Koepka, who is on seven-under-par for the tournament. "To be where I'm at, as badly as I putted and hit the ball today, I'm pleased with it."

Three-time major champion Koepka birdied the first hole but looked like he might unravel after running into trouble at the par-five second where he made a double-bogey after his drive found the trees to the left and second shot went in a hazard.

Koepka responded immediately with a birdie but then had a pair of bogeys over the next three holes, at which point it appeared the new leaders would begin to pull away on an Augusta National layout that was softened due to rain.

But Koepka righted the ship with a birdie at the par-five eighth and then played solid golf on the back nine with birdies at 15 and 18, the latter which will surely send him into the night feeling better.

"I know some people don't think I'm mentally tough, or tough in general, but I think I am," said Koepka. "I've proven that with three (major) trophies.

"I feel like no matter how things are going, whether they are going really well or really poorly out there, I can grind it out, and especially during a major."

Koepka, who has won two of the last three majors and missed last year's Masters due to a wrist injury, is not about to panic or overanalyse what happened during the second round.

"I've been playing this game for 22, 23 years. Nothing is going to change overnight," said Koepka. "I know how to play the game. I just know how to hit the ball. I know I'm going to go out there and go do what I normally do.

"I'm not trying to, you know ‑‑ just because it's a major on a Saturday, I'm not going to go out and do anything different. Just go tee it up, look where I want to hit it and fire at it."

 (Editing by Peter Rutherford)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — The Mexican flag has been waving proudly at Augusta National with amateur Alvaro Ortiz taking the baton from Maria Fassi and carrying it into this week's Masters with his eyes on a Green Jacket.

After a four-decade absence, Augusta National is getting a fresh taste of Latin flair served up by a new generation of Mexican golfers primed to battle for titles.

Fassi provided Ortiz with a tough act to follow by finishing runner-up to Jennifer Kupcho in the inaugural Augusta National Women's Amateur after a stirring back-nine battle with the American on Saturday.

Now Ortiz steps into the spotlight as he becomes the first player from his country since Victor Regalado in 1979 to play at the Masters and only the second Mexican amateur following Juan Antonio Estrada who featured at Augusta from 1962-64.

The determined Ortiz finished runner-up in the two previous Latin America Amateur Championship tournaments before this year claiming the title and his Masters invite at the third attempt.

"It was a huge deal for my family and me for sure and the whole country," said Ortiz, who will turn professional immediately after the Masters. "When I came back to Mexico after winning, it was all cheers and people were so happy.

"People were so proud that I was going to be able to put a Mexican flag up there."

Ortiz said he had received plenty of advice ahead of Thursday's opening round with most people telling him to relax and enjoy the experience.

But the 23-year-old, showing no fear and more than a little cockiness, said he would be trying to win a Green Jacket like everyone else, although admitting if given a chance to sign for a top 10 right now he would take it.

"In my mind, I'm out here to compete and I want the Green Jacket," he said. "I think every player is thinking like that.

"Of course, winning the low amateur would be nice," he said referring to the Silver Cup awarded to the lowest amateur to make the cut.

"Making the cut would be a really good finish too but if you give me a top 10 right now, I'll sign it for sure."

While a top 10 finish would guarantee a Masters invite next year, Ortiz is soaking up every moment of his experience now.

He will spend Monday night in the Crow's Nest above the Augusta National clubhouse, where amateurs have traditionally slept, and promised to bite into the local delicacy -- a pimento cheese sandwich -- at some point. 

"Yeah, everybody was talking about that," Ortiz said with a smile. "Actually, I received more arguments about the... chicken barbecue sandwich, which I think is pretty good. I already tried that one, but I'll have to try the pimento cheese."

 (Editing by Ken Ferris)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — The Mexican flag has been waving proudly at Augusta National with amateur Alvaro Ortiz taking the baton from Maria Fassi and carrying it into this week's Masters with his eyes on a Green Jacket.

After a four-decade absence, Augusta National is getting a fresh taste of Latin flair served up by a new generation of Mexican golfers primed to battle for titles.

Fassi provided Ortiz with a tough act to follow by finishing runner-up to Jennifer Kupcho in the inaugural Augusta National Women's Amateur after a stirring back-nine battle with the American on Saturday.

Now Ortiz steps into the spotlight as he becomes the first player from his country since Victor Regalado in 1979 to play at the Masters and only the second Mexican amateur following Juan Antonio Estrada who featured at Augusta from 1962-64.

The determined Ortiz finished runner-up in the two previous Latin America Amateur Championship tournaments before this year claiming the title and his Masters invite at the third attempt.

"It was a huge deal for my family and me for sure and the whole country," said Ortiz, who will turn professional immediately after the Masters. "When I came back to Mexico after winning, it was all cheers and people were so happy.

"People were so proud that I was going to be able to put a Mexican flag up there."

Ortiz said he had received plenty of advice ahead of Thursday's opening round with most people telling him to relax and enjoy the experience.

But the 23-year-old, showing no fear and more than a little cockiness, said he would be trying to win a Green Jacket like everyone else, although admitting if given a chance to sign for a top 10 right now he would take it.

"In my mind, I'm out here to compete and I want the Green Jacket," he said. "I think every player is thinking like that.

"Of course, winning the low amateur would be nice," he said referring to the Silver Cup awarded to the lowest amateur to make the cut.

"Making the cut would be a really good finish too but if you give me a top 10 right now, I'll sign it for sure."

While a top 10 finish would guarantee a Masters invite next year, Ortiz is soaking up every moment of his experience now.

He will spend Monday night in the Crow's Nest above the Augusta National clubhouse, where amateurs have traditionally slept, and promised to bite into the local delicacy -- a pimento cheese sandwich -- at some point. 

"Yeah, everybody was talking about that," Ortiz said with a smile. "Actually, I received more arguments about the... chicken barbecue sandwich, which I think is pretty good. I already tried that one, but I'll have to try the pimento cheese."

 (Editing by Ken Ferris)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Georgia — When Justin Rose launches his 14th bid for Masters glory this week he will be armed with expert knowledge of Augusta National's notoriously tricky greens and something perhaps even more valuable -- a good friend. 

After three months apart, the newly re-minted world number one told reporters on Monday that he was pleased to be reunited with long-time caddie Mark 'Fooch' Fulcher, who had to take time off following heart surgery in January.

"I feel like we've learned together so much here, I wouldn't expect a nugget of information I don't know to come out during practice," Rose said after a practice round.

He added that Fulcher's presence would be especially valuable in the later rounds of the tournament, when emotions run high.

"It's when the going gets tough," Rose said. "We have so many positive experiences out there under pressure that we can draw on together."

The 2013 U.S. Open champion has clinched a top-10 finish on five separate occasions at The Masters. 

But perhaps no single outing at Augusta National was more formative to Rose than his devastating playoff loss to Spaniard Sergio Garcia in 2017.

"I felt like that was the first major I've been close to and not won, really, like a heartbreaker," Rose said. "I think I took comfort in the fact that you can't get through a career without something like that happening."

It was far from the only setback. Injuries to his shoulder and back nagged at Rose in 2014 and 2016, respectively, and he pulled out of an August 2018 World Golf Championships event citing joint tightness.

The 38-year-old Olympic gold medalist has had time to bounce back, notably netting his 10th PGA tour victory in January with a two-shot win over Adam Scott at Torrey Pines.

Rose, who took a month off in February after missing the cut at the Saudi International, is now looking to add to his trophy case with a second major win.

"I would take four, as long as it's one of each," Rose said. "That would be awesome. That would be enough."

 (Reporting by Amy Tennery; editing by Ken Ferris)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

AUGUSTA, Ga. — They crowded hundreds deep around the 18th green, roaring when those lucky enough to be in front signaled the first sight of Tiger Woods in his familiar red coming up the fairway.

Up by the clubhouse, the kitchen help stood in white jackets and hats, much like a previous generation did all those years ago. In front of them, a group of young people working this week as trash pickers tried unsuccessfully to find a piece of higher ground to witness history.

Few in the huge throng had any hope of seeing anything. But they could hear, and on this day that was enough.

Off to the side of the green, the Woods children had a much better view. His daughter, Sam, was a year old when dad won his last major championship and son, Charlie, had yet to be born.

They had watched last summer as Woods tried desperately to break his major championship drought at the British Open, only to come up just short.

"I wasn't going to let that happen to them twice," Woods said.

On a magical afternoon at Augusta National, there was no chance of that happening. Woods didn't let them or any of his millions of fans around the world down on a day that will live in Masters lore, already thick with Woods' achievements.

This wasn't his signature win from 22 years ago, when he was the young phenom who thrilled the country by romping to victory for the first time at Augusta National.

But it seemed just as good, just as satisfying, both to him and the massive galleries that did all they could to try and will him to a win.

"To come back here and play as well as I did and did all the things — all the little things well this week, and to do it here," Woods said, choking up at the thought. "This has meant so much to me and my family, this tournament, and to have everyone here, it's something I'll never, ever forget.

At the age of 43, he's a major champion again after fighting his way through a leaderboard filled with young talent, most who list Woods as a golf hero. He seized control of the tournament with near kick-in birdies on the 15th and 16th holes.

That got him his fifth green jacket, but this meant more. So much more.

All the doubt. All the doubters.

All the issues no one ever expected Woods to have.

"I don't know of a better comeback in sports in my lifetime," former champion Zach Johnson said.

America got up early to watch Woods try and win a major from behind for the first time, after tee times were moved up nearly six hours because of threatening weather.

And America got quite a show.

Woods grabbed the lead in Amen Corner when everyone around him seemed to be hitting balls into Rae's Creek. Then he held on for dear life as the birdies started pouring in from those playing in front of him.

"Now I know why I'm balding," Woods said. "This stuff is hard."

The key to his remarkable day, though, might have come after a 3-putt on the fifth hole that left him three shots behind Francesco Molinari, who had beaten him at the British Open in front of his kids.

Caddie Joe LaCava had seen enough, and gave Woods a talking too on the way to the sixth hole.

"He was saying some things that I can't really repeat here," Woods said. "Then I went into the restroom and proceeded to say the same things over and over to myself. And then came out and I felt a lot better."

Woods called it a grind, and it was until his tee shot on the par-3 16th hole almost went in. It became a coronation on the final holes, as roars echoed with each birdie and the inevitability of it all started to sink in.

The crowd was thrilled, even those who had to listen to figure out what was happening out of sight. So, it seems, was almost every sports hero around the world.

Tom Brady was watching from his couch and tweeted his congratulations. Serena Williams took a break from partying at fellow tennis player Caroline Wozniacki's bachelorette party to see it all unfold.

"I am literally in tears watching," Williams tweeted . "This is Greatness like no other."

President Donald Trump and former President Barack Obama weighed in, and so did Steph Curry, calling it the greatest comeback in sports. At the Orioles game in Baltimore they played a highlight of Woods on the 18th green during a break between innings as the crowd cheered.

Woods himself screamed out in sheer joy after sinking his final putt, and no one could blame him. It had been a long, tortured path back to the top and the way it all ended at the place that he loves best couldn't have been scripted in a Hollywood movie.

It had been 14 long years since his last Masters win. Eleven years since his last major championship.

And now the question becomes not can Woods win again, but whether he can beat the record of 18 major championships set by Jack Nicklaus.

"I really haven't thought about that yet," Woods said. "I'm sure that I'll probably think of it going down the road. But right now, it's a little soon, and I'm just enjoying 15."

So was LaCava, who signed on to Woods's bag at a time where he was still dealing with back issues and a messy DUI and wasn't sure he would even play again. LaCava has been on the bag to see Woods change both as a player and a person.

"He's high-fiving people, he's signing some autographs," LaCava said. "He's much more fan-friendly, which is awesome."

The two fans Woods wanted to win for most were in his family.

They got hugs from dad on the green, then walked with him through an opening in the crowd as chants of "Tiger, Tiger, Tiger" rang out.

"I hope they're proud of their dad," Woods said.

Surely they are. But they're not alone.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

LINCOLN, Neb. — Noor Ahmed outwardly lives her Muslim faith, and even growing up in a state as diverse as California she says she encountered hostility on the street, in school and on the golf course.

One of the top junior golfers in Northern California coming out of high school, Ahmed was a starter in her first year at Nebraska and the No. 2 player most of this spring. She is believed to be the only golfer at the college level or higher who competes in a hijab, the headscarf worn in adherence to the Muslim faith.

Arriving in Lincoln two years ago, Ahmed sensed hesitancy from teammates mostly from small Midwestern towns and unaccustomed to seeing a woman in a hijab. She didn't feel embraced until an unfortunate yet unifying event roiled the campus midway through her freshman year.

A video surfaced of a student claiming to be the "most active white nationalist in the Nebraska area," disparaging minorities and advocating violence. The student, it turned out, was in the same biology lecture class as Ahmed.

Teammates offered to walk with her across campus, and one who would become her best friend, Kate Smith, invited Ahmed to stay with her. She didn't accept but was heartened by the gesture.

"That," Smith said, "was when she realized how much each and every one of us care for her on the team, that it wasn't just like, 'Hey you're our teammate.' No, it's 'We want you to be safe, we want you to feel at home here.'"

Having grown up in the post-9/11 era, Ahmed, like many Muslims in the United States, has been a target for bullying and verbal abuse. She began wearing the hijab in middle school.

On the course, in an airport or even walking across campus she can feel the long stares and notices the glances. She said she has never been physically threatened — "that I know of" — and that most of the face-to-face insults came before she arrived at Nebraska.

Much of the venom spewed at her now comes on social media. She has been the subject of several media profiles, and each sparks another round of hateful messages. She acknowledges she reads but doesn't respond to messages and that an athletic department sports psychologist has helped her learn how to deal with them.

"I've been called every racial slur in the book," she said. "I've been told explicitly that people who look like me don't play golf, we don't have a right to exist in America, you should go home. It would definitely faze me a little bit, but it never deterred me. I'm really stubborn, so I'm going to prove you wrong, just wait. When people think they're dragging me down, it kind of fuels the fire in me that I'm going to be a better golfer, I'm going to be a better student, I'm going to keep climbing up the ladder."

The daughter of Egyptian immigrants is from a close-knit family in Folsom, California, and she steeled herself for the cultural adjustment she would have to make at Nebraska.

She dealt with loneliness and anxiety, especially her freshman year. She had difficulty finding a support network. There is a small Muslim community on campus, but she didn't immerse herself in it. The demands on athletes are great, and they are largely segregated, eating and studying in facilities separate from those used by regular students.

Nebraska coach Robin Krapfl said she was initially concerned about how teammates would react to Ahmed. Krapfl remembered meeting with her golfers and telling them about her.

"I could tell by a couple of the looks and maybe even a comment or two that they weren't 100 percent comfortable with that," Krapfl said. "A lot of our girls come from small-town communities that are very limited in their ethnicity. It's just the fear of the unknown. They had just never been exposed to being around someone from the Muslim faith."

Krapfl said she saw a golfer or two roll their eyes, another shook her head. "I overheard, 'Why would Coach bring someone like that on the team?' "

"Luckily when she got here people could see her for who she was and the quality of person she was," Krapfl said. "It took a while. It really did. You've got to get to know somebody, who they really are and not just what they look like."

Smith said she sometimes cringes when she and Ahmed are in a group and the conversation turns to politics, immigration or even fashion, like when someone innocently or ignorantly tells Ahmed that she would look good in a short dress or a certain hairstyle.

"She can never wear a short dress, so why would you want to depict her as that?" Smith said. "You have to respect her beliefs and why she's doing it. Also, I think a lot of things are connected to women's beauty standards and how people don't think she can look beautiful when she's covered. I think she's a really beautiful girl no matter how much skin she's showing."

For all the challenges Ahmed faced, there have been positives. Some people have complimented her for living her faith as she sees fit, a Muslim teen who golfs in a hijab and lives in the United Kingdom wrote to says she draws inspiration from her, and a player for another college team approached her at an event to tell her she recently converted to Islam and just wanted to say hi.

"I remember going and crying and, wow, I'm not alone out here," she said.

Ahmed said she's naturally shy and a bit uncomfortable with the attention, but she hopes Muslim girls coming up behind her are watching.

"I grew up never seeing anyone like me," she said. "Honestly, I didn't realize how much grief I was carrying, having never seen an image of myself or someone who looked like me in popular American culture. It's a big deal.

"Why are basketball and football so heavily African American? If I were black and I saw people who looked like me competing in that sport, that's probably the sport I would choose. I think it's really important when we're talking about trying to make golf and other sports and other areas in American culture diverse, how important it is to see someone who looks like you and how it will fuel other people's interest."

Ahmed started playing golf at 8, and her parents encouraged her to take the sport to the highest level possible. Wearing the hijab has never interfered with her game and she has never considered not wearing it on the course.

"I think Muslim women who choose to observe it or choose not to observe it have the right to exist in any space they want to be in," she said, "and I would feel like I would be sending a message that the hijab doesn't exist in this place or it shouldn't, and I don't feel comfortable with that."

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

PONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. — At last week’s Arnold Palmer Invitational, Phil Mickelson carded a 68 in the first round while chewing gum. The next day, without gum, he sprayed his shots all over the Bay Hill course and shot a 78.

A coincidence? Mickelson thinks not.

To boost his cognitive functioning, Mickelson, 48, started chewing gum during competition in January at the Desert Classic — and tied for second. Two starts later, chewing gum as he walked, Mickelson clinched his 44th PGA Tour title.

“The chewing aspect stimulates the frontal cortex,” said Mickelson, who couldn’t get his putter activated Thursday in the opening round of the Players Championship. Mickelson, the 2007 champion, had a four-putt from 25 feet on the par-3 third hole, which was his 12th of the round, for a triple-bogey 6 on his way to a two-over-par 74. That left him nine strokes behind the leaders, Tommy Fleetwood and Keegan Bradley, who each posted a 65.

“It didn’t help much today,” Mickelson said with a rueful laugh. But, to the amusement of his peers, Mickelson has no plans to give up the gum.

“I’ve seen him chomping on that gum, and I was wondering what he was doing,” Steve Stricker said. “Leave it to Phil, I guess, to come up with that.”

There is some actual science to Mickelson’s assertions. Studies have shown that chewing gum is associated with improved alertness and the ability to process new information, though the results are far from definitive. A 2011 study by psychologists at St. Lawrence University found that students who chewed gum and then discarded it performed demanding cognitive tasks like repeating numbers backward and solving complex logic puzzles better than those who did not chew gum.

Mickelson’s caddie and younger brother, Tim, said he could not speak to the science of gum chewing, but he could vouch for Mickelson’s improved focus. Last year, he said, Mickelson on occasion would ask him to pick a club for him to hit because he couldn’t gather his thoughts. An inability to focus hadn’t been an issue this year, Mickelson’s brother said.

In the copycat world of professional golf, where players have turned their searching minds to mouth guards, tobacco chewing and copper bracelets as performance aids, could Mickelson’s success this year spawn other gum chewers?

Any players tempted to make like Violet Beauregarde, the “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory” character who obsessively worked the same piece of gum for months at a time, should consider themselves warned. Serge Onyper, who co-wrote the St. Lawrence University study, noted in an email on Wednesday that those who chewed gum for five minutes before getting rid of it benefited compared with those who did not chew gum at all. But, he wrote, “those who chewed the gum throughout the cognitive tasks did not benefit compared to those who did not chew gum.”

Mickelson, 48, said he chews two pieces per round, but would not divulge the type or brand. “It’s not on the market yet,” he said.

Gum comes with and without sugar, with caffeine and, now, infused with cannabidiol, or CBD, which has been used to treat a variety of symptoms, including joint inflammation. It is categorized by the tour as a dietary supplement and is not prohibited, though players are advised to use extreme caution when using it and other supplements because, in general, there is no guarantee that what’s on the label is what’s in the product.

Tiger Woods noted that Michael Jordan chewed gum when he played basketball and said he has chewed gum on occasion for a quick sugar boost. There have been other gum chewers in the game, notably Payne Stewart, a three-time major winner. In the 1980s, the golfer Hubert Green bestowed upon Tim Norris the nickname Pac-Man because he chomped gum the way the arcade game character gobbled ghosts.

Paul Azinger, NBC’s lead golf analyst, described Norris, the 1982 Greater Hartford Open champion, as “the greatest gum chewer in the history of golf,” a distinction that made Norris chuckle when it was recently relayed to him.

Norris described his gum chewing as “a nervous habit” and said he preferred the spearmint flavor “because it was green, and if I did accidentally drop it, it blended into the grass.”

After Norris left competitive golf and embarked on a college coaching career, “I kind of grew out of the habit,” he said.

Billy Horschel, the 2014 FedEx Cup champion, was forced to curb his gum habit recently when he started wearing a clear aligner on his upper teeth. Horschel described his gum chewing as “kind of a superstitious thing” but said it served a purpose.

“I could chew on it harder when I needed to work out some frustrations,” he said Thursday after signing for a 69.

Some players never stuck with gum chewing long enough for it to become habit-forming. It was not calming for Bubba Watson, who said, “I tried to do it to take my mind off things going on but I bit my tongue too much.”

And Stricker said, “I started chewing gum and all of the sudden I was building up tension in my jaws because I started really grinding on it.”

In 2017, Jordan Spieth chewed gum on his way to winning the British Open for his third major title.

“I did it for no intended reason,” said Spieth, whose swing coach, Cameron McCormick, offered him a piece of gum before his opening tee shot. He got off to a quick start and just kept chomping on it until after he was done with his post-round news conference.

Spieth hasn’t made gum chewing a habit, “but I think there’s something to it,” he said. “I could sit here and say Phil’s blowing smoke but this one makes sense. When you’re focused on chewing, that can take your mind off of golf and can kind of calm players a bit.”

If Mickelson is so sold on gum’s cognitive benefits, why didn’t he chew his standard two pieces during the second round of the Arnold Palmer Invitational, where he ended up missing the cut?

“I forgot,” he said.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Kimon de Greef

CAPE TOWN — Clifford van der Venter admits his own golf game is “pretty useless.” Nevertheless, he was drawn to one of South Africa’s most prestigious golf estates, stretching over 2,500 rolling acres with a Jack Nicklaus signature course, two full-size polo fields, three gyms and a winery.

Grapevines flank the boulevards. Zebra and antelope nibble grass on a small reserve.

After a fast-paced career in the corporate world, Mr. van der Venter, 54, enjoys strolling through the grounds of Val de Vie, a gated community 35 miles north of Cape Town that has been judged South Africa’s best for the past two years by New World Wealth, a market research group based in Johannesburg. He also feels extremely safe there.

Estate developments — often built in combination with upscale golf courses — are hugely popular among wealthier homeowners in South Africa, consistently outperforming the general market, largely because they offer a combination of amenities and, as at Val de Vie, state-of-the-art security.

An analysis of the sector in 2016 by Lightstone Property, a local valuations firm, identified approximately 6,500 estate developments across the country. These accounted for about 5 percent of all residential homes but more than 15 percent of the market value.

Only the United States, with a population six times as large, has more of what are known there as gated communities.

In a country with a long history of racial turmoil, the South Africa pattern invariably results in communities dominated by white people (only about 10 percent of South Africa’s population), with others effectively excluded by income. Mr. van der Venter, a person of color,was a senior executive at Caltex and British American Tobacco, among other companies, before retiring and moving here.

Many of the communities combine armed guards, cameras and electric fences with recreational facilities like golf courses and gyms. Some, such as Raptor’s View, near Kruger National Park in the northeastern part of the country, include wildlife reserves.

Basil Weinrich, a real estate consultant from Cape Town, said more than 40 percent of wealthy South Africans — defined as people earning more than about $70,000 a year— now either live or own property on security estates, a figure that is steadily rising.

Crime dominates South African life. On average, 56 people are murdered every day, according to the most recent police statistics, making it one of the most violent countries on earth, according to the United Nations.

The police recorded nearly 230,000 burglaries last year, or 625 daily. Some experts estimate that the true burglary figure is perhaps three times that high. Break-ins and car highjackings can quickly turn almost gratuitously violent, with victims beaten and raped if they do not quickly turn over valuables or open safes. Banks and high-end malls are routinely patrolled by guards holding automatic weapons.

“South Africans consistently rank crime among their top concerns, second only to unemployment,’’ said Andrew Faull, a senior researcher at the Institute for Security Studies. But, he added, “although the middle class and wealthy South Africans may feel restricted by fear of crime, they are sigificantly less restricted than the poor majority.’’

For people who can afford to move from “bubble of security to bubble of security,” he said, life can be “quite easy.”

It was almost by accident that Mr. van der Venter became converted to this way of life.

For more than a decade he had owned a sprawling property in Cape Town, not perturbed by its long, dark driveway or ramshackle fencing. Then he took a job in the east coast city of Durban, moving into an estate development popular among his new colleagues.

Soon afterward, he said, he began feeling “mentally free.”

No longer did he need to worry about locking his doors at night. His wife and children could walk around the estate after dark. He became aware of a subtle fear that had pervaded his life and was now lifting.

Upon returning to Cape Town, he planned to move back into his old home. “But now you realized you had this fear,” he said. “We knew we were never going back.”

Instead, in 2010, he and his wife purchased property at Val de Vie near Paarl. It is protected by thermal cameras, 24-hour dog patrols and an electrified, wrought-iron perimeter fence.

“Safety is the main concern, of course, but you also get this incredible lifestyle,” Mr. van der Venter said.

Purchased in 2002 as a disused clay quarry, Val de Vie now has 1,500 completed homes, apartments and hotel rooms. A second phase of 1,000 units is under construction, according to the marketing director, Ryk Neethling. Vacant lots typically cost $15 to $20 per square foot, while homes go for $150 to $330 per square foot.

“Many residents who built in Phase One have already invested in Phase Two,” said Mr. Neethling, a former Olympic swimming champion, on a recent tour through the development. “They see the dust and construction sites and know that in a few years, it will look like this.”

Properties at Val de Vie range from individualized seven-acre small holdings (“Gentleman’s Estates”) to one-bedroom apartments designed by one of South Africa’s most prominent architects, Stefan Antoni. Most properties are family homes with gray roofs and large windows, conforming to a building code that is “flexible but ensures some consistency,” Mr. Neethling said.

Nate Foster, a cellphone tower developer from Boulder, Colo., moved into one of these homes in January. With five bedrooms, large glass-walled living areas and a 50-foot swimming pool, it cost less than $1 million. A comparable property back home, Mr. Foster said, would have cost three to four times as much.

He and his wife had been “really resistant” to lifestyle estates since relocating to Cape Town in 2015, Mr. Foster said, wanting “more of a cultural experience.” But “the realities of South Africa still exist,” he went on. “Keeping one eye open all the time wasn’t desirable.”

There’s also the convenience factor. Mr. Foster, a triathlete, said he can train more easily at Val de Vie before going to work. A new fitness center on the estate, the Yard, has an Olympic-size swimming pool and a gym run by John McGrath, a seven-foot Irishman who used to perform in strongman competitions at Coney Island in New York.

“What’s special about this place is the community,” said Mr. McGrath, who stays in shape by bending metal wrenches into hoops.

But like Mr. Foster, the overwhelming majority of residents at Val de Vie are affluent and white. About 15 percent are foreigners, mostly from Europe, Mr. Neethling said, adding that between 10 percent and 15 percent are nonwhite.

Adding more affordable housing options to the estate — still beyond the reach of all but the wealthiest South Africans — has helped broadened access without “contaminating” prices, said Mr. van der Venter. In fact, the apartments, introduced in 2014, have been among the most successful developments at Val de Vie, with the highest average value per square foot (approximately $165) and investment returns of 100 percent in just two years.

“I signed up to buy two but backed out,” said Mr. van der Venter, who also owns an office block on the estate. “You keep thinking this bubble is going to burst. Now I’m kicking myself.”

Even with South Africa’s weak economy having strained property prices over the past decade, residential estates continued to perform well, said Andrew Amoils from New World Wealth.

There was “massive growth” in the sector from 2000 to 2008, but it slowed after the global financial crisis, Mr. Amoils explained. Even so, he said, “it still consistently outperforms the general market.”

In recent years, there has been a pronounced trend of developers’ interspersing townhouses and apartments among larger houses, Mr. Amoils said. Obtaining permission to build new estates had become more difficult, particularly as concern about water use rose amid increasingly frequent droughts, and rising rates and taxes had made big homes less affordable.

Still, there was the safety issue. “People get used to living like this,” Mr. Amoils said.

On a recent evening, as the sun set above the polo fields, Chad Marthinussen and Chanell Classen, both 25-year-old doctors, returned to their rental apartment after work. “You can come home from a crazy shift to this prettiness and just switch off,” Ms. Classen said.

She grew up in Bonteheuwel, a working-class suburb outside Cape Town. She and Mr. Marthinussen are planning to marry. They both loved the estate’s security and relaxed atmosphere, but they also shared some ambivalence.

“If we have kids, we don’t know if we’d want them growing up here,” Mr. Marthinussen confessed. “It feels like a safe bubble. And that’s amazing, but the real world isn’t like this.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — It was a clash of the ages at the Masters Par-3 contest on Wednesday as 28-year-old Matt Wallace triumphed over 61-year-old Sandy Lyle during an afternoon of thrilling play that included four holes-in-one. 

A time-honored tradition at Augusta National, the Par-3 contest sees Masters competitors and the old guard play on a truncated course with shorter holes, with their children and spouses often serving as caddies.

Along with collecting the trophy, however, comes a famous curse as no winner has gone on to win the Masters in the same year. 

Wallace, who kicks off his Masters bid on Thursday, shrugged off the so-called jinx, after a playoff win against two-times major winner Lyle.

"It got a little bit more serious than how the nine holes went and I guess I just I wanted to win this," Wallace said. "I want to break history somewhat." 

Some of the game's greats, such as Gary Player and Jack Nicklaus were involved alongside current players such as Bubba Watson and Dustin Johnson, and for a crowd hungry to see a hole-in-one, the day did not disappoint.

Wallace landed an ace at the eighth hole, while Mark O'Meara, the 1998 Masters and British Open champion, snagged the day's first hole-in-one to wild applause, followed by 32-year-old Shane Lowry, who sunk one on the first hole.

Nineteen-year-old Devon Bling equaled the record for the youngest registered player ever to make a hole-in-one on the course.

Last year, Nicklaus' 15-year-old grandson, who was caddying for him, sunk a hole-in-one on the ninth hole, marking a memorable family moment in an event where one is as likely to see a toddler on the course as a major winner.

One-year-old Azalea, named after Augusta's 13th hole, caddied for her father, 2017 Masters champion Sergio Garcia, and was an early crowd favorite as she toddled onto the green appearing completely at home on the course.

"The golfers are in their element but they're having fun," said Sean Neely, an Atlanta resident who has attended the Masters for 47 years.

Seeing players on TV "it's like seeing a movie star," said Pam Herzwuran, who has visited the Masters for seven years. Seeing them with their families makes them feel more accessible, she said.

"It makes it so normal."

 (Reporting By Amy Tennery; Editing by Toby Davis)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Mihir Zaveri and Annie Correal

For eight years, it seemed to Margarita Cruz that the management at the Trump Organization’s golf club in Westchester County, N.Y., did not notice — or did not care — that the green card and Social Security card she had used to get hired were fake, purchased in Queens for about $120.

Ms. Cruz, a housekeeper, said she cleaned guest rooms, offices and shops at the club. She laundered sheets and pool towels. But that all ended this month, she said.

Ms. Cruz and about a dozen other employees — housekeepers, landscapers and a head chef — at the club, Trump National Golf Club, were fired Jan. 18 because they were in the country illegally, according to interviews with Ms. Cruz and the former workers’ lawyer.

The firings were first reported on Saturday by The Washington Post.

The New York Times reported in December that undocumented immigrants had been employed at another club owned by the Trump Organization, the Trump National Golf Club in Bedminster, N.J., and that they were kept on the payroll for years even though management there had some knowledge of their fraudulent papers.

Several workers deemed ineligible to work in the country had already been fired at the Bedminster club, according to people familiar with the matter.

The employment of undocumented workers at Trump Organization properties runs counter to President Trump’s anti-immigrant rhetoric, which he has made central to his campaign and his presidency. He is currently in a heated political battle to build a wall along the border with Mexico, which he claims would stop drugs and crime. Evidence does not support Mr. Trump’s thesis.

There is nothing to indicate that Mr. Trump or Trump Organization executives knew about the workers’ immigration status at either golf club. But Ms. Cruz, 44, said she believed that management at the Westchester club knew about her immigration status before January.

Her papers were requested again two years ago, she said, not just when she was hired. Anibal Romero, who represents Ms. Cruz and 14 other former workers at the golf club, the majority of whom were fired Jan. 18, was stronger in his wording.

“I’m not buying that they didn’t know,” Mr. Romero said.

Neither Ms. Cruz nor the other former workers received benefits like health insurance or a pension, as other golf club employees did, Mr. Romero said. Most of his clients came into the country through Mexico, Mr. Romero said, and were originally from countries such as Mexico, Ecuador and Honduras.

“This was a two-tiered system,” he said. “The people who were legal and the people who are undocumented.”

He said the workers were fired by being individually called into a room by an executive, who read their names off a list.

The White House referred questions to the Trump Organization on Saturday. The Trump Organization and the Westchester golf club did not respond to requests for comment.

In a statement to The Post, Eric Trump, who manages the Trump Organization with his brother Donald Jr., said: “We are making a broad effort to identify any employee who has given false and fraudulent documents to unlawfully gain employment. Where identified, any individual will be terminated immediately.”

Ms. Cruz entered the United States in 2009 near Piedras Negras, Mexico, on the Texas border, she said, with a 12-year-old daughter and a 9-year-old son. Her parents had paid a coyote $11,000 for the trip.

She said that in Mexico she earned about $40 a week working at a restaurant. She started at $11 per hour at the golf club, and then got a raise to $14 per hour. She said she did not have any savings when she was fired because she had been paying back her parents.

Mr. Trump’s political rhetoric has been surprising, she said, because he would regularly come by the golf club before his election and give the workers $50 tips in cash.

“He would come over and say hello, ask your name and how long you had worked at the club,” Ms. Cruz said. “He would ask you how you liked the rug, or a picture on the wall, things like that.”

She added, “If he really did hate Latinos so much, why did he come over to talk to us?”

She said some of her colleagues had worked at the golf club for 18 years.

“I couldn’t understand why he started talking like that about Latinos now and why he fired us,” she said.

Mr. Romero said he is seeking federal and state investigations of the golf club to see if it had been exploiting the undocumented workers.

Follow Mihir Zaveri on Twitter: @MihirZaveri.







Advertisement

Once a year, Augusta National Golf Club opens its exclusive gates to the world for the Masters. The world is treated to a jewel of history and nature.

CreditCreditDoug Mills/The New York Times

Supported by

Photographs by Doug Mills

The New York Times

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Augusta National Golf Club holds a unique place in the American psyche.

Slow to integrate, and with only male members until seven years ago, the private club is among the most exclusive playgrounds in the country, a haven for masters of the universe and Southern aristocracy.

And then, for one week each year, the club throws opens its gates to welcome tens of thousands of “patrons,” the world’s top golfers and a handful of aging legends. They all line up just after sunrise and enter a world bursting with color and towering pine trees.

There is an unreal quality to it. The grass underfoot doesn’t feel like the grass in your front yard. Does that shade of pink and purple azalea exist anywhere else? How is it possible that amid all this vegetation, there are seemingly no bugs?

Perhaps it’s best not to ask these questions. Answers will probably not be provided. So take in the splendor of the fans in their colorful golf shirts and sundresses reflecting off the ponds, and the magical talents of players who can skip golf balls off the water.

Gaze at all those spots that had existed only on television. There’s the Hogan Bridge over Rae’s Creek. There’s the patch of pine straw where Bubba Watson stood when he somehow hooked that miracle shot onto the 10th green in 2012. And look at all those green blazers. The members wear these throughout the week, in case you were wondering.

Open your eyes. There is much to see.

An earlier version of a picture caption with this article misidentified a golfer finishing his first round. It was Bernhard Langer, not Phil Mickelson.

Doug Mills has worked as a photographer in the Washington bureau since 2002. He previously worked at The Associated Press, where he won two Pulitzer Prizes for his photography.   

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

Jin Young Ko vaulted from fifth-ranked to No. 1 overall in the Rolex Women's World Golf Rankings on Monday, one day after the South Korean claimed her first major title.

Ko fired a 2-under-par round of 70 on Sunday to win the 2019 ANA Inspiration at Mission Hills Country Club in Rancho Mirage, Calif.

The 23-year-old Ko finished at 10-under 278 to become the fifth South Korean winner of the tournament.

Now, she's the fifth South Korean player to reach No. 1 status, joining Inbee Park, Sung Hyun Park, So Yeon Ryu and Jiyai Shin.

"Reaching World No. 1 is exciting and I cannot believe that I have achieved this honor," Ko said in a statement. "I always keep my focus on the golf course and on my playing, but to win a major championship and be called the best player in the world is absolutely a great honor. I want to thank my family, my caddie and my manager for all of their support."

Her title Sunday was Ko's second victory of 2019, as she also claimed the 2019 Bank of Hope Founders Cup in mid-March. With the win, she earned 625 points and extended her lead in the Race to the CME Globe, where she entered the tournament 177 points ahead of Nelly Korda (1,155).

Sung Hyun Park, supplanted at No. 1 after five weeks, struggled to a 6-over 78 to finish at 4 over in a tie for 52nd. She fell to second place, just ahead of Thailand's Ariya Jutanugarn -- who started the year at No. 1.

Australia's Minjee Lee and Japan's Nasa Hataoka round out the top five.

American Lexi Thompson, who finished third on Sunday, jumped three spots to No. 6.

--Field Level Media

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Jeff Shain

Rory McIlroy went for the bold play, even if it turned out a little off line.

Asked how he had dealt with four unfulfilled attempts to complete golf’s career Grand Slam, McIlroy offered a historical reference as perspective.

“I guess I’ve become a lot more comfortable with the fact that I’m going to fail more times than I succeed at that certain conquest,” he said, pointing out that Abraham Lincoln even lost some elections. “He wound up being the president of the United States,” McIlroy said. “So I’ve still got a bit of time.”

McIlroy knows the select fraternity he would join if he added a Masters to the titles he already won at the United States Open, British Open and P.G.A. Championship. The full set of majors has been captured by only five men, including Jack Nicklaus and Tiger Woods.

Also this year, Jordan Spieth can achieve a career Grand Slam at next month’s P.G.A. Championship and Phil Mickelson can at the United States Open in June. But it’s McIlroy who is up first at Augusta National Golf Club in Georgia.

“I know exactly the people I would be putting myself alongside,” he said. “It would be huge. But again, I can’t think about it that way.”

He has lately been on a roll. Even for someone who seems to have plenty of time (McIlroy is 29), the momentum he brings into this year’s first major doesn’t come around often.

Last month’s one-stroke victory at the Players Championship capped a run of six starts to open 2019 in which he finished no lower than sixth. He also reached the round of 16 at the WGC Match Play in March, eliminated on the 17th hole of a tense battle with Woods.

“Right now it’s all Rory McIlroy,” said Paul Azinger, NBC’s lead golf analyst. “He’s in contention every week. We’ve criticized him whenever he didn’t win, then he goes ahead and wins the biggest event on the PGA Tour.”

“You just get the feeling that it’s going to be a big Rory year.”

Though McIlroy is No. 3 in the world rankings, behind Dustin Johnson and Justin Rose, no one has accumulated more ranking points since the calendar turned.

“When his mind’s right and he’s putting good,” said Jason Day, who will also play at the Masters, , “I think he’s explosive.”

McIlroy has shown an ability to pile up wins in bunches. He collected 14 of them worldwide from 2012 through 2015, including three of his four major championships. He was second on 12 other occasions during that span.

That said, McIlroy’s current success has been marked by a different demeanor and he is calm as he considers the big picture. Tournament results can vary, but performance is the yardstick.

“You’re not going to get frustrated playing good golf,” he said.

Even with a green jacket — and a permanent entry in golf history — at stake?

“There’s a difference between a personal desire and a need,” McIlroy said. “I would have said a couple of years ago, ‘I need to win a Masters. I need a green jacket’. Now it’s, ‘I want to win it. I’d love to win it. But if I don’t, I’m O.K.’ And I think that is the difference.”

Success by McIlroy, Spieth or Mickelson would elevate them to a stratosphere occupied only by Gene Sarazen, Ben Hogan, Gary Player, Nicklaus and Woods.

“When I first came out, I just wanted to win any major,” Mickelson said at last year’s U.S. Open. “Any major would have been great. Now that I’ve won the other three majors, it’s U.S. Open specific. I would love to win this one to win all four. That’s certainly a goal and nothing I’m shying away from.”

McIlroy said it would be great if all three golfers achieved the Grand Slam.

“How good would it be this year if Jordan won the P.G.A. and Phil won the U.S. Open and I won Augusta?” McIlroy said. “Golf would be right in the center of all sports stories if that were to happen.”

Not only is McIlroy leading off the quest, he’s also widely considered by analysts to have the best chance of breaking through.

“If I was a betting man, I would bet that he gets it,” said Jim Mackay, now an NBC analyst after two decades as Mickelson’s caddie.

A couple of years ago, such expectations might have affected McIlroy. This is his fifth trip to Augusta in which the Masters has beckoned as the lone missing piece from his major collection.

Each of his previous four Masters had left McIlroy exactly six strokes behind the winner. His final position has ranged from fourth to a share of 10th, but the six-shot gap has been unyielding.

His closest call came last year, only to wind up the most disappointing. Trailing Patrick Reed by three and playing alongside him in the final pairing, McIlroy cut into the deficit on the first hole and faced a short eagle putt at No. 2 that could have drawn him even.

McIlroy missed, tumbled to a closing 74 and wound up with a share of fifth.

“That’s when you really have to preach patience,” McIlroy said. “You know the golf is in there; it’s just letting that golf come out when it matters most. I need to almost take my foot off the gas and just let it happen. And that’s obviously easier said than done.”

Then again, he needs only to look at the past few months to see how the process can pay dividends.

Though he was unable to clinch first against Xander Schauffele’s charge at Kapalua in January, against Johnson in Mexico in February or in his own lack of birdie chances in March on the final day at Bay Hill in Florida, McIlroy latched onto positives.

Then when victory finally arrived at the Players, his reaction, a weak fist pump, was subdued.

“It’s been having a focus over the last six of seven months on my attitude, especially my attitude to golf,” said McIlroy, who married shortly after the 2017 Masters. “Not letting golf define who I am as a person, trying to keep the two things very separate.”

It’s a mind-set some players don’t attain until long after they’re 29. For now, it seems to have freed McIlroy to play the most consistent golf of his career. It may yield a green jacket, but if it doesn’t, he’s prepared to deal with it.

“At the end of the day, all you’re trying to do is get that ball in the hole,” he said. “If you feel like you’re doing that pretty well, then what’s there to be frustrated about?”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Kevin Draper

A day after Tiger Woods won his fifth Masters title and 15th major tournament in a rousing resurrection of his career, President Trump said Monday he would give him an honor almost as exclusive as a green jacket from Augusta National Golf Club: the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

Mr. Trump said on Twitter that he would bestow the award, without saying when. “Because of his incredible Success & Comeback in Sports (Golf) and, more important, LIFE, I will be presenting him with the PRESIDENTIAL MEDAL OF FREEDOM!,” Mr. Trump wrote.

Spoke to @TigerWoods to congratulate him on the great victory he had in yesterday’s @TheMasters, & to inform him that because of his incredible Success & Comeback in Sports (Golf) and, more importantly, LIFE, I will be presenting him with the PRESIDENTIAL MEDAL OF FREEDOM!

The Presidential Medal of Freedom is the nation’s highest civilian honor, and is awarded to those who make outstanding contributions to national security or national interest, world peace, culture or other public or private endeavors. The medal has been awarded since 1963, and is typically given to a dozen or fewer people each year.

Over the years numerous sports figures have received it, especially under the presidencies of George W. Bush, Barack Obama and Mr. Trump, all noted sports fans.

Just last year Babe Ruth, Roger Staubach and Alan Page were awarded Presidential Medals of Freedom. Woods will not be the first golfer to get the award; Arnold Palmer and Jack Nicklaus were honored in consecutive years in the mid-2000s, and Charles Sifford, the first African-American to play on the PGA Tour, was honored in 2014. But it is rare for an active athlete to receive the honor.

Mr. Woods has a longstanding relationship with Mr. Trump, an avid golfer. They own property near each other in Florida and have golfed together a number of times, both before and after Mr. Trump became president.

In February, Mr. Trump tweeted a picture of himself with Woods and Nicklaus at the Trump National Golf Club in Jupiter, Fla. The next day, Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter, “Tiger is back & will be winning Majors again!”

Over the years Mr. Trump has repeatedly tweeted about watching Mr. Woods play golf.

They are also business partners. Mr. Woods is designing the course at the Trump World Golf Club Dubai, set to open in 2019.

Mr. Woods acknowledges having played golf with Mr. Trump and having eaten together, but otherwise is reluctant to speak about their relationship. “Well, he’s the president of the United States,” Mr. Woods said last year. “You have to respect the office.”

Still, while several African-American athletes have criticized Mr. Trump or kept their distance, Mr. Woods, who is of African-American and Thai descent, has maintained his relationship with him.

When asked last August after a tournament if he had any thoughts about race relations in America, Mr. Woods demurred. “No, I just finished 72 holes,” he said. “And really hungry.”

Email Kevin Draper at kevin.draper@nytimes.com or follow him on Twitter: @kevinmdraper.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Golf

By Karen Crouse

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Jack Nicklaus was fishing in the Bahamas on Sunday as Tiger Woods resumed circling him in the quest for Nicklaus’s record of 18 major golf championships. But in his news conference after winning the Masters for his 15th major title, Woods didn’t sound exactly bloodthirsty.

“I’m sure that I’ll probably think of it going down the road,” Woods said, referring to Nicklaus’s 18 victories at golf’s four major tournaments. “Maybe. Maybe not. But right now, it’s a little soon, and I’m just enjoying 15.”

Then again, Woods didn’t have to say much. His clubs had delivered a convincing argument that he is “trending in the right direction,” as Woods is fond of saying. Tony Finau, who was grouped with Woods in the final round, was more succinct.

“From what I saw today,” Finau said Sunday, “obviously he’s not going anywhere.”

Brooks Koepka, who has won three majors since 2017, felt confident going out on this limb: “I think 18 is a whole lot closer than people think.”

How about three-months-off close?

What Woods put into play Sunday was the elusive calendar Grand Slam — winning all four majors in the same year. No player in the modern era has done it. In golf’s storied history, only one man, the amateur Bobby Jones in 1930, has managed it.

[What’s next for Tiger Woods? Here’s the schedule for golf’s major events.]

Woods has come exquisitely close. He claimed the United States Open, the British Open and the P.G.A. Championship in 2000 and the Masters in 2001 for what became known as the Tiger Slam.

The next two majors are at courses on which Woods already has a record of success.

The P.G.A. Championship will take place next month at Bethpage Black on Long Island, site of Woods’s wire-to-wire victory at the 2002 U.S. Open (he also tied for sixth when the tournament returned there in 2009).

The U.S. Open is in June at Pebble Beach in California, where Woods won the 2000 tournament by a record 15 strokes — and where he also won the annual PGA Tour event the same year. If Woods is going to chase the great white whale of golf records, he couldn’t ask for more inviting seas.

During an 11-year major title drought that was exacerbated by injuries and ignominy, Woods needed to be in contention on the back nine in the final round a couple of times before he broke through. His first tests came at last year’s final two majors, and Woods acquitted himself well, sharing sixth place at the British Open and finishing second at the P.G.A. Championship.

“The 15th was always going to be the hardest,” said Rickie Fowler, 30, who joined the PGA Tour in 2010 and had seen Woods win nine tour titles before Sunday.

Tiger Woods’s record in the 11 years since his last victory in a major tournament.

MAJORS

M: THE MASTERS

U: U.S. OPEN

B: BRITISH OPEN

PGA TOURNAMENTS ENTERED

TOP 10

WON

P: P.G.A. CHAMPIONSHIP

YEAR

5

10

15

20

M

U

B

P

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

MAJORS

M: THE MASTERS

U: U.S. OPEN

B: BRITISH OPEN

PGA TOURNAMENTS ENTERED

TOP 10

WON

P: P.G.A. CHAMPIONSHIP

YEAR

5

10

15

20

M

U

B

P

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

By The New York Times

But two of the golfers who finished one stroke behind Woods — Xander Schauffele, 25, and Koepka, 28 — joined the tour after Woods’s last dominant season, his five-title haul in 2013. Of Woods’s 81 tour victories, one shy of tying Sam Snead’s career mark, they experienced only the 2018 Tour Championship up close and personal.

And yet, if anything, they seemed energized, not enervated, by their head-to-head battle with Woods.

“It’s what I saw as a kid,” Schauffele said.

Schauffele and Koepka are too young to have been demoralized by Woods in his peak years. They saw his name at the top of the leaderboard Sunday, and they rejoiced.

“You want to play against the best to ever play — you want to go toe to toe with them,” Koepka said.

He added: “I enjoy the battle. I enjoy everything that goes on with it. He got the better of me this time, and it’s fun and I’m sure he’s ecstatic about it, but hopefully there will be more.”

Even with the depth in the men’s game, do you really want to bet against Woods?

In the last three majors, his worst finish is a sixth, and if you calculate his average finish, he has fared slightly better than Italy’s Francesco Molinari (tie for fifth, tie for sixth, win) and much better than Koepka, who won the P.G.A. Championship but finished outside the top 30 at last year’s British Open.

Justin Thomas? He has a tie for 12th, a tie for sixth and a missed cut. Schauffele? He has two second-place ties but finished outside the top-30 at the P.G.A. Championship.

“My last three major championships have been pretty good,” Woods said, “so that in itself gives me a lot of confidence going down the road.”

Woods’s fifth Masters victory drew comparisons to Nicklaus’s sixth, which came in 1986 when he was 46. Nicklaus never won another regular tour event, although he contended at the 1998 Masters at 58, finishing tied for sixth. He was four strokes behind the winner, Mark O’Meara, but two ahead of Woods, who, at 22, was the defending champion.

Woods rarely played more than two tour events — if that — between majors during his prime, so this year’s schedule, which is compressed to allow for a Labor Day finish, shouldn’t pose a problem. People underestimate his enduring passion for competition at their peril.

“In the tournaments I do play in,” he said Sunday, “I’ll be fully invested and committed to playing and trying to win.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

Augusta, Ga. — While the Masters is renowned for attracting the world's top players, a busy PGA tournament schedule and a field of competitors perpetually in flux means you never know who else might be in the field at Augusta National.

First-timer Keith Mitchell likes it that way. 

The 27-year-old American makes his Masters debut by virtue of securing his first PGA championship last month at the Honda Classic, claiming victory with a final, 15-foot birdie putt.

"There are forty-something events, there are going to be guys that get their first win every year," Mitchell told reporters on Monday.

"What's so great about our sport is the unknown, someone who you might have never heard of wins this week and then you might be able to follow him for the next ten years."

While the University of Georgia graduate played the Augusta National course as a college student, he is better acquainted with life among the throngs of spectators.

Of course, a practice round in the glare of The Masters spotlight changed that. 

"There were probably more people watching me warm up on a Monday here than at a lot of tournaments I've played in my life," Mitchell said.

"I've always watched people and admired how they hit the shots and hit their wedges and the shapes of the drivers, and then I was the guy that people were watching."

With six top-10 career PGA finishes, Mitchell will look to establish his foothold in the year's first major, when The Masters kicks off on Thursday. 

"I still kind of feel like a rookie and still feel just kind of in awe of the place," Mitchell said. "And I hope that never goes away."

 (Reporting by Amy Tennery; Editing by Ken Ferris)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Randy Youngman

SAN DIEGO — To be the best, you have to beat the best. That’s what Justin Rose did over the past four days to win the Farmers Insurance Open at Torrey Pines, protecting his status as the world’s top-ranked golfer.

After a shaky start Sunday that included three bogeys over his first five holes, Rose recovered to shoot a three-under-par 69 and beat his close friend Adam Scott by two shots. Rose conquered a field that featured 12 of the top 20 players in the world rankings to record his 10th PGA Tour victory, passing Nick Faldo for the most tour wins by a player from England in the modern era.

Rose, 38, finished with a 72-hole total of 21-under 267, a tournament record since the South Course was redesigned in 2003 and one shot off the overall record of 22 under shared by Tiger Woods (1999) and George Burns (1987). Scott birdied the final four holes to close out a 68 and finish at 19 under. Hideki Matsuyama (67) and Talor Gooch (68) tied for fourth at 16 under.

The scores were unusually low because recent rain had softened the greens, and there was very little wind coming off the Pacific Ocean.

“Twenty-one under par at Torrey Pines is great golf, ” Rose said, dedicating the win to his caddie, Mark Fulcher, who is hospitalized but doing well after having heart surgery last week. “This one’s for him.”

Scott said his closing surge was “too late” because Rose had built a four-shot lead and birdied two of the final four holes himself. Scott also blamed himself for missing two short putts on the front nine, one from 18 inches on No. 5.

“I think Justin performed like the No. 1 player should today,” Scott said. “When he was shaky, he bounced back nicely. He showed why he’s the No. 1 player in the world.”

Rose’s three-shot lead at the start of the day was trimmed to one after he made bogeys on Nos. 1, 4 and 5. But he played bogey-free the rest of the day while making five more birdies.

“I never lost the lead, so I had to stay patient,” Rose said. “I scratched a line on my scorecard after the sixth hole and said, ‘We build a round from this point on.’ ”

Scott moved to two shots behind with a tap-in birdie on the par-4 17th and needed an eagle on the 18th hole to force a playoff. But he hit his tee shot into a bunker left of the fairway and had to lay up. Both players made birdie on the final hole with short putts.

In his first event of the 2019 season, Tiger Woods was never a factor. His weeklong putting woes continued Sunday on his first nine, but he rediscovered his stroke with five birdies over his final eight holes to shoot 67, finishing in a tie for 20th at 10 under. He shot all four rounds under par at Torrey Pines for the first time since 2008, and it was his first sub-70 round here since 2013, the year of his most recent of seven titles in the event.

“It was nice to shake off some rust,” Woods said. “I think the whole week was good, very positive. I wasn’t as sharp as I wanted to be, but each and every day it got a little better. I was hitting my putts on my lines; I just wasn’t reading them right. I burned a lot of lips and made my share today, which was nice.”

Woods said his next event would be the Genesis Open at Riviera Country Club (Feb. 14-17), where his charitable foundation is the primary beneficiary.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Second-round play at the Masters was suspended on Friday due to dangerous weather in the area of Augusta National.

The horn sounded to clear spectators from the course with major winners Francesco Molinari, Jason Day and Brooks Koepka all sharing the clubhouse lead at seven-under.

Players were greeted by steady rain as play began on Friday but the skies cleared allowing over half of the 87-player field to complete their rounds before action was halted.

Several prominent players were still on the course when the horn blasted, including Rory McIlroy and Tiger Woods, who had just hit his tee shot on the par-three 12th.

 (Reporting by Steve Keating. Editing by Toby Davis)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — After 26 Masters appearances, it is hard to catch three-time champion Phil Mickelson off guard even with a revamped fifth hole that has been the talk of Augusta National this week.

Steely play may be in order at the redesigned Magnolia, where the tee has been moved back 40 yards, but Mickelson told reporters on Tuesday that he was taking it in his stride.

"I think 4, 5, 6, 7 is a very difficult four-hole stretch and making it a little bit harder I think is a good thing," Mickelson said. "I always like making hard holes harder."

Experience on the difficult greens is something Mickelson can rely on to help snag a Green Jacket for the fourth time, with his 100th career round at the Masters slated for Friday.

"There are always little subtleties and nuances that you have to relearn," he said.

"Every time I come out here and practise, I pick up a little something here or there that I did not know on how to play a certain shot from a certain position to a certain pin."

If he can secure victory, it will be by defying the odds. Mickelson, who will turn 49 in June, is roughly two and a half years older than the oldest Masters champion Jack Nicklaus, who claimed his sixth victory in 1986 at the age of 46. 

Mickelson already has a career befitting one of the game's greats, having spent over 25 years on the PGA tour, with 195 top-10 finishes, 44 PGA championships and five major wins. 

That does not mean he is looking to slow down anytime soon.

"There's no reason now with the knowledge we have in fitness, the knowledge we have in biomechanics, and the knowledge we have with nutrition and so forth, that we, at a much older age than in the past, should not be able to perform at a very high level," Mickelson said.

The only major to elude him has been the U.S. Open, in which he has either tied for or placed second on six times. 

But after winning the Pebble Beach Pro-Am in February, it seems a career grand slam may still be in reach since this year's U.S. Open will be played on the same course.

 (Reporting by Amy Tennery; editing by Ken Ferris)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

(Reuters) - After missing the proverbial boat for the inaugural Augusta National Women's Amateur, the Jutanugarn sisters Ariya and Moriya instead made do with a chance to caddie in the par 3 competition at the Masters on Wednesday.

They shared the bag toting duties for fellow Thai Kiradech Aphibarnrat, even teeing it up on one hole, where all three swung simultaneously.

Ariya and Moriya turned professional in 2012, seven years before women finally got a chance to stride Augusta National's famous fairways in competition, albeit sans professionals.

"We want to play it," said world number three Ariya of the course as she and Moriya stood in their white caddie overalls outside the clubhouse on a warm and cloudless afternoon.

A visit last year allowed Ariya to admire the beauty of Augusta.

"Last year when I walked with Kiradech all 18 (holes) twice, I thought this course is amazing," she said.

"I thought one time in my life I would really like to play here. I'm really jealous."

Ariya and Moriya have earned between them $11 in career prize-money on the LPGA Tour.

But that does not stop them from wishing they had enjoyed a chance to compete at Augusta National.

"We don't have that chance when it is our time," said Moriya, before adding "hopefully one day."

 (Reporting by Andrew Both; Editing by Christian Radnedge)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

ORLANDO, Fla. — After his Friday round at the Arnold Palmer Invitational, Rory McIlroy spent the afternoon at Walt Disney World riding the Tower of Terror amusement park ride. He was persuaded to take the excursion by his wife, Erica, who reminded him that he visited Disney’s parks last year and two days later produced an enchanted final round for a come-from-behind victory, his 14th on the PGA Tour.

For those who hitch their allegiances to McIlroy, following him can be a white-knuckle ride. McIlroy ranked first in the field in driving distance for the measured holes, 314 yards, and he played his way into the final Sunday pairing for the ninth time since January of last year — and for the third time in 2019. And for the ninth time since January of last year — and for the third time in 2019, McIlroy, a four-time major winner and a former world No. 1, could not close out a tournament from the last group.

Francesco Molinari, the reigning British Open champion from Italy, who began the final round at Bay Hill five strokes off the lead, carded an eight-under-par 64 to finish at 12-under, two better than the 54-hole leader, Matthew Fitzpatrick, who posted a 71.

McIlroy, who closed with a 64 on his way to last year’s title, shot 72 to finish in a four-way tie for sixth. It is his fifth top-six finish in five starts this calendar year, and also his 12th top-eight finish in his last 23 worldwide starts.

During his final-pairing run of close calls, McIlroy, 29, has lost to some of the top players, including Tiger Woods, Dustin Johnson, Justin Thomas, Patrick Reed and Molinari.

“I’m playing well,” McIlroy said. “I would much rather be putting myself in position to have a chance to win.”

That is the lottery-half-won way of looking at it. The other way to view it is that when the title has been within his grasp, McIlroy has not hit his approaches close enough or putted well. On Sunday, he played the par-5s in one-under.

“I just didn’t play the par-5s well enough,” McIlroy said, adding, “I was saying to Matt walking up 17 it’s like we’re hitting really good shots, but we’re leaving ourselves putts that we were sort of being defensive with because you don’t want to run it 6 feet by trying to hole them.”

Putting was not a problem for Molinari, who drained four birdie attempts of more than 17 feet, including a 21-footer at No. 1 and a 44-footer at No. 18.

“One of my best putting rounds ever,” said Molinari, who also coolly sank an 11-footer to save par at the second.

The first of Molinari’s three victories last season came at the BMW P.G.A. Championship at Wentworth, which was the third time in 2018 that McIlroy was in the final group. He began the fourth round tied with Molinari, who shot four under for a two-stroke victory over McIlroy. By the end of the summer, Molinari had added the Quicken Loans and British Open titles — and McIlroy had played his way into three more final-round pairings: at the World Golf Championships event in Ohio, the BMW Championship and the Tour Championship.

“When I won last year, playing with Rory,” Molinari said, “it wasn’t easy at all. So from there, I started building my confidence and just saying I could get it done.”

Molinari, 36, was grouped for the first two rounds with Brice Garnett and Ted Potter Jr., two golfers with zero major titles and three PGA Tour wins between them.

Despite his No. 10 world ranking and his star turn with Tommy Fleetwood for the European team at last year’s Ryder Cup, Molinari seemed easy to overlook on the leader board. Keith Mitchell, who consolidated his first tour title last week with a tie for sixth at Bay Hill, signed his scorecard for a closing 66 — and an eight-under total — while the leaders were on the front nine.

Asked what he thought the winning score would be, Mitchell guessed 10 or 11 under and said, unbidden, “I think Rory McIlroy’s obviously proven himself time in and time out” so that if he went lower, he added, “I wouldn’t even be surprised.”

McIlroy is determined not to let the results define him. “Yeah, my Sundays haven’t been what I would have liked,” he said, “but I’m putting myself in that position. Good golf is good golf.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

PEBBLE BEACH, Calif. — A few dozen spectators and three grazing deer surrounded the first tee at Monterey Peninsula Country Club on Thursday, craning their necks to get a better look at the players beginning the hole. The foursome included Aaron Rodgers, the Green Bay Packers quarterback who grew up five hours away in Chico, starred collegiately at California and was trailed all day by cries of “Go Bears” — which he acknowledged by saying, “Go Bears, but not Chicago.”

Rodgers, though, was not his group’s main attraction, and he was fine with that. In fact, he essentially signed up for a supporting role. Last month, he used his Twitter account to petition to play the first three rounds of the AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am with Choi Ho-sung, the 194th-ranked player in the world who was making his PGA Tour debut on a sponsor’s exemption.

Choi’s swing was known in the United States long before he arrived at Pebble Beach. It has become a viral sensation because Choi, a South Korean native and a regular of the Japan Tour, is a cross between Chi Chi Rodriguez and Fred Astaire.

Choi spins around on his follow-through as if his club is his dance partner. His pre-swing routine is also unique, resembling an oblique muscle stretch; he swivels to his left and his eyes lock on his left shoulder as he holds his club high, as if to light a kerosene street lamp. He pauses at the top long enough to exhale loudly, making a “shoo” sound before settling over his ball.

Jordan Spieth, the three-time major winner and the 2017 champion at Pebble Beach, had seen videos of Choi and was among those eager to see him up close.

“I actually was fascinated, clearly, by his swing, and the way he moves around,” Spieth said, adding: “It’s just really entertaining. I think people are really excited to see him this week.”

Choi, 45, did not take up the game until he was around the same age as the 25-year-old Spieth, but he has developed a showman’s touch. The bigger the crowd, the more he appears to play to it. Upon being introduced to warm applause on the first tee, Choi bowed to the fans on three sides of the tee box before settling into his pre-shot routine.

On a different tee, he took his driver head cover, decorated with studded stars, and pretended to give a back rub to Rodgers and Jerry Kelly, the other pro, by brushing it over their sweaters. Later, the other amateur, the actor Chris O’Donnell, was teasing Rodgers about his mustache, which called to mind Burt Reynolds’s facial hair in the 1970s film “Smokey and the Bandit.” Rodgers looked at Choi, who was standing nearby, and Choi gave him the thumbs up.

“See,” Rodgers said, “Ho-sung likes it.”

Choi surprised Rodgers with his English abilities, after Rodgers surprised Choi by greeting him in Korean. Kelly introduced himself to Choi on the practice green with an outstretched hand and a wide grin. “We will have so much fun!” he told him.

After the round, Choi broke into a broad smile of his own and said that Kelly had been right.

“I think my pairing was just as good as the weather,” Choi said through an interpreter, referring to the abundant sunshine and negligible breeze, “and I learned a lot from Jerry Kelly.”

Choi knows that he has a lot of catching up to do. He was training for a job in the fishing industry, he said, until he lost the tip of his right thumb in a chain saw accident at 23.

Doctors reattached the tip, and Choi redirected his focus, landing a part-time job at a golf course two years later. It was there that he honed his self-taught swing.

This is his first trip to the United States, he said, and he arrived with loads of enthusiasm but not a single endorsement. His black cap and turquoise sweater both featured the Pebble Beach Golf Links logo, and his caddie carried a new TaylorMade bag that seemed tailor-made for Choi, with a silhouette logo of his follow-through, complete with the kick flourish.

Choi said he chose his first-round outfit purposefully. “I wanted to show my appreciation for the tournament for having me out here,” he said, adding, “I’m incredibly grateful, and that’s why I’m wearing the logo.”

The group was led by Jonah Webster, a 16-year-old golfer from Sonora, Calif., roughly 170 miles northeast of Monterey Bay. His grandfather, Steve Lee, who walked alongside him Thursday, said Webster had trembled with excitement when he found out he would be carrying the scoring sign for Rodgers, one of his idols, and Choi, whose swing he had watched on YouTube.

Lee joked that he had told his grandson to close his eyes when Choi took the club away, because his swing was not exactly something that impressionable youngsters should be trying. “It’s fun to pull for a guy who’s so unique,” Lee said.

Outside the ropes, others seemed to share Lee’s sentiment. They cheered for every good shot and great escape orchestrated by Choi, who was four over after 10 holes but made three birdies in the final eight to salvage a one-over 72. At the end of the second round on Friday, he was tied for 128th place at four over.

“I definitely felt the love from my fans,” Choi said, “and I felt like that pushed me more to focus on the back nine.”

Choi’s struggles notwithstanding, he at least impressed Rodgers. “He’s not a sideshow,” the quarterback said. “He can play, and I think it’s really good for golf.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — The fifth hole at Augusta National is certainly not the most famous, but this year it could be the hardest after being stretched so far that they had to reroute the road that ran behind the old tee. 

The par-four has been turned into a brute, lengthened some 40 yards to nearly 500 yards, officially 495 though the number will change slightly each day depending on where the pin is put.

The tees will also likely be moved a few yards each day.

"I think number five is probably going to play the toughest hole now for sure," said world number one Justin Rose.

The hole, which curves gently to the left without being a dogleg, still has two deep bunkers guarding the left-hand side, encouraging players to aim more for the right side of the fairway.

Rory McIlroy, perhaps the longest hitter in the field, used to worry about his ball running through the fairway and into bushes on the right, and often used a three-wood off the tee for safety instead of a driver.

Now he can swing away without fear.

"I think (hole) five has been a very good change in terms (that) it puts driver back in a lot of guys' hands that wouldn't necessarily hit driver on that hole," said the Northern Irishman.

"And you need to hit driver; because I came here last Wednesday, played in the morning, it was a little cold, a little damp and I hit four-iron into the green.

"If you hit three-wood and you're 30 yards back of (where driver would stop) you're on the upslope and you can hardly see the green."

Tiger Woods succinctly summed up the new hole.

"It's just long," he said on Wednesday. "The bunkers are still deep. I think they are unplayable to get the ball to the green."

The hole was parred more than two-thirds of the time in 2018, when it yielded only 26 birdies all week, along with 64 bogeys and four double-bogeys. 

It was the sixth hardest of the week.

It is likely to give up even fewer birdies this week, but a lot more bogeys.

"I always like making hard holes harder," said three-times Masters champion Phil Mickelson.

For the shorter hitters, the game plan has not really changed.

"The tee shot is pretty much the same shot," said British Open champion Francesco Molinari, who is not a particularly long hitter.

"The second shot, obviously is longer, considerably longer. Yesterday it was playing into the wind, and probably with the old tee we would have been hitting seven-iron in, and we were hitting four-iron in yesterday. 

"I think that's going to be around a three-club difference."

 (Reporting by Andrew Both in Cary, North Carolina; Editing by Toby Davis)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Michael Arkush

On Sunday, April 15, 1979, Ed Sneed was about to win the Masters. He was leading by three shots with three holes to go. Then, suddenly, the game became as cruel as it can possibly be.

Sneed, who had started the day ahead by five, bogeyed 16, 17 and 18 — his par putt on 18 hung on the lip — then lost on the second hole of a sudden-death playoff to Fuzzy Zoeller. Sneed, who is now 74 and finished his career with four tour victories, never came close again to winning a major. He left in 1985 to go into the investment business.

In a recent interview, Sneed reflected on that time. The conversation has been edited and condensed.

How often does someone bring up 1979?

For the first five years, there would be articles in magazines the week or month before the Masters. Every year, since that Masters, there’s been at least one or two guys who have called me. This year, there seems to be more focus on it, and I’ve had quite a few calls because it’s the 40th anniversary.

How did losing that tournament affect your life?

I probably would have played the tour longer. I don’t think it made me basically a different person. I’ve often said, in my reaction, nobody died. I had a chance to win a big golf tournament, and I didn’t. It did have an impact, but at the same time, I never felt like it destroyed me in any way.

Watching the final round recently, it looked as if there were not any shots on the last three holes you’d want to take back except the approach on 18, which missed the green. Is that right?

That’s right. I always heard, “Well, you hit to the right at 16.” I didn’t hit to the right at 16. I hit a draw. Why the ball didn’t bounce to the left, I don’t know. At 17, [where his approach finished a few yards over the green] I discovered the next year I had the wrong yardage by three or four yards.

You thought the putt on 18 was in, didn’t you?

I thought the putt would just barely move to the right. So, I hit the ball at the left side of the cup. And when it was about two feet away, it looked like it had moved a little bit toward the hole. I thought it was going right in, and then it hung on the left. It looked like a quarter of the ball was hanging over the hole.

The next year, I was playing a practice round on Wednesday afternoon after the Par 3 tournament. I was by myself. I started at 10. At the 11th green, Hord Hardin, the [acting] tournament chairman, told me, “Ed, that was tough luck last year, but we feel that you waited about 12 seconds to tap it in, and under the rules you only had 10, and if it had fallen in, we would have been in a dilemma, and we probably would have had to penalize you a stroke.”

You realized pretty soon that how you’d respond to the loss would be a test.

I ended up going to the Tallahassee Open the next week, and one of the press guys sat down next to me, and this is something I’ve always held on to. When I got back to the house in Augusta that night, my girls at the time were 4½ years old and barely 2. My 4½-year-old had been watching television. When I walked in, she came running up to me and said, “Daddy, you won, you won.” I realized that it didn’t make any difference to them. I was still their dad.

When people ask me, “Do I think about it?” I sure do. Not as much now as I used to. I don’t dwell on it. I’ve never felt like, “Why me?” You look at things that go on around the world, and other people’s circumstances. What did I do? I missed a putt to win the Masters. If that’s the worst thing that happened to me, even in just golf, so be it.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Bill Pennington

Tiger Woods on Monday withdrew from this week’s Arnold Palmer Invitational because of a neck strain. While Woods played down the injury, any fresh health setback to the game’s most popular player has often elicited alarm throughout the golf community.

Recognizing that level of concern, and aware that a series of lower back surgeries nearly ended his career, Woods tried to mitigate the expected reaction to his exit from the Palmer event, which he has won eight times.

“My lower back is fine, and I have no long-term concerns,” Woods wrote on his Twitter account.

1) Unfortunately due to a neck strain that I’ve had for a few weeks, I'm forced to withdraw from the API. I’ve been receiving treatment, but it hasn't improved enough to play. My lower back is fine, and I have no long-term concerns, and I hope to be ready for The Players.

Woods, 43, indicated he has been bothered by the neck strain for “a few weeks,” and added: “I’ve been receiving treatment, but it hasn’t improved enough to play.”

Woods’s neck issue may indeed be minor, but for many years when he struggled to play through myriad infirmities, Woods often withdrew from a tournament with a similarly short statement about a seemingly insignificant injury. In the end, he missed dozens of events, and his absences from competition lasted months because of multiple, serious knee operations and four back surgeries.

On Monday, Woods did offer one encouraging sentence: “I hope to be ready for The Players.”

The Players Championship, which is the PGA Tour’s flagship event and is often called a fifth major golf championship, runs from March 14 to 17. Woods’s optimism about playing in the tournament will help calm worries about his golf fitness for now.

But should he miss that tournament, a fair amount of panic will probably ensue about his ability to continue a startling comeback that was one of the most uplifting stories in sports last year. The Masters begins in five weeks, on April 11.

Six months ago, Woods completed an unforeseen return to golf’s upper echelon and ended a five-year winless drought, with a victory at the season-ending Tour Championship. It was the 18th tournament that Woods played in 2018 — his first full schedule of events since 2015. He did not miss a tournament he was scheduled to appear at last year.

This year, Woods has already played three times. Eight days ago, he finished tied for 10th at the Mexico Championship. At that event, Woods did not mention any neck discomfort, and he did not say Monday how the injury occurred. In his two other events this year, Woods tied for 20th at the Farmer Insurance Open at Torrey Pines in late January, and he shared 15th place at the Genesis Open at Riviera in mid-February.

Woods last won the Arnold Palmer Invitational in 2013, although he made a charge up the leaderboard at the event last year before stumbling in the final holes to finish in a tie for fifth place.

“I’d like to send my regrets to the Palmer family and the Orlando fans,” Woods wrote on Twitter on Monday. “Its connection to Arnold makes it one of my favorite tournaments and I’m disappointed to miss it.”

Woods, who has won 80 PGA Tour events and 14 major championships, has elevated his world golf ranking to 12th. That ranking had slipped as low as 1,199th while he battled various leg and back injuries.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Jim Windolf

The studios at Fox News, CNN and MSNBC filled with anchors and commentators, waiting for Attorney General William P. Barr to make news on Sunday afternoon with the release of a letter summarizing the findings of the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.

As the cable teams assembled, NBC News prepared to interrupt a golf tournament and ABC News got ready to break into coverage of a professional video-game contest.

NBC was the first broadcast network to provide details of Mr. Barr’s four-page summary of Mr. Mueller’s far lengthier and still unpublished report. The network’s justice correspondent, Pete Williams, stood before the Justice Department headquarters in Washington and simply read aloud from the attorney general’s letter to Congress.

After he was through, Kate Snow, the NBC anchor on duty, said, “Some of what you just read cold on the air is a lot of legalese.”

Mr. Williams scanned the document and found a key sentence about Russia’s attempt at meddling in the 2016 presidential election: “‘The special counsel did not find that the Trump campaign or anyone associated with it conspired or coordinated with the Russian government in these efforts,’” Mr. Williams said, reading aloud.

He also said that, while the report apparently did not conclude that President Trump had committed a crime, it also did not exonerate him.

On CNN at roughly the same time, three correspondents, who were seated side by side (by side) in the network’s Washington studio, stared at their phone screens and called out important phrases from the Barr letter.

Their well-meaning efforts were interrupted by the anchor Wolf Blitzer, who read aloud a tweet that had been posted by Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York: “‘The Special Counsel states that ‘while this report does not conclude that the President committed a crime, it also does not exonerate him,”’” Mr. Blitzer said.

Mr. Blitzer ceded the stage to Jeffrey Toobin, the CNN legal analyst, who said that, in his view, Mr. Mueller’s report amounted to “total vindication of the president and his staff on the issue of collusion.”

After a fanfare of timpani drums, George Stephanopoulos of ABC broke into that network’s broadcast of a professional video-game contest at 3:42, a few minutes after NBC had aired its live reading of the news-making letter.

The matter of Mr. Mueller’s elusiveness came up during the ABC special report. “We never heard from the man in 22 months,” Mr. Stephanopoulos said of the special counsel.

Pierre Thomas, the senior justice correspondent for ABC, nodded in agreement and recalled being told that “Robert Mueller would be the president’s best friend, if he found no evidence of collusion.”

CBS waited until 3:51 to cut into its coverage of the annual men’s college basketball tournament with a 90-second report by Paula Reid, a correspondent covering the Justice Department and the White House.

When a full gamut of panelists appeared on CBS, they were not news reporters, but sports commentators, and they were offering halftime analysis. “It feels like it should be more than an 8-point lead for Carolina,” Greg Gumbel said of a game between the University of Washington and the University of North Carolina. (CBS followed the game commentary with a second report from Ms. Reid and its chief White House correspondent, Major Garrett, also during halftime.)

Hours before Mr. Barr had provided his rundown of the much-anticipated report — which Mr. Mueller had assembled in seemingly leakproof silence over a 22-month period — it was the main fodder for the politically oriented Sunday morning shows and early-afternoon cable news programs.

Chuck Todd led a wall-to-wall discussion on NBC’s “Meet the Press.” It included commentary on whether the Democratic presidential candidate Beto O’Rourke had jumped the gun at a campaign stop on Friday when he said: “This is an unprecedented attack on this country and on our democracy, and we are owed the facts. And if we do not receive them, 243 years in, there’s nothing that guarantees us a 244th.”

On “Fox News Sunday,” the program hosted by Chris Wallace, Representative Doug Collins, Republican of Georgia, said the president had been proved right in repeatedly saying “no collusion.” On the same show, Mr. Nadler called for the release of the entire report and its underlying materials.

Also in the morning hours, on CNN’s “Reliable Sources,” the host Brian Stelter asked of whether reporters and talking heads had inflated expectations.

He seemed to be reacting to an analytical article posted online on Saturday by the Rolling Stone journalist Matt Taibbi, who wrote that the lack of new charges emerging from the report “is a deathblow for the reputation of the American news media.” Mr. Taibbi cited instances of overreaching by some reporters and pundits to make his case.

Mr. Stelter pushed back against that view. “Don’t be fooled by the partisans who cherry-pick the worst mistakes of individual journalists or the craziest ideas from commentators and claim that’s the entire media,” he said.

The problem, Mr. Stelter said, lay in the competing interests of “agenda-driven columnists” and “journalists who report the news.” He put Joy-Ann Reid, of MSNBC, and Jesse Watters, of Fox News, in the agenda-driven camp. Then he rolled a clip of Ms. Reid suggesting that Mr. Barr may have an interest in covering up the facts; and another of Mr. Watters characterizing the Mueller report as “a knockout blow to the Democrats and the press who say, ‘Collusion, collusion, collusion.’”

The Nixon-era reporting led by Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein of The Washington Post seemed newly exceptional, now that Mr. Mueller’s work was done. Mr. Bernstein, a CNN contributor who was a guest on Mr. Stelter’s show, praised recent coverage of President Trump and the allegations that have surrounded him. He singled out the journalism of The Wall Street Journal — owned by Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation — as a sign that democracy was working.

Noting its assiduously reported articles on Mr. Trump, Mr. Bernstein said, “It ought to be stressed that the same owner of Fox News published these stories in his paper.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Best of Late Night

By Giovanni Russonello

Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox.

On Day 26 of the partial government shutdown, Jimmy Kimmel said he might have figured out a way to convince President Trump to abandon his course. He noticed that Trump hadn’t played golf since before the shutdown began. (He last played on Nov. 25, the longest spell without a golf game in his presidency.)

Kimmel presumes that Trump knows it would look bad for him to be out on the course instead of negotiating with Democrats to reopen the government.

“I know it doesn’t mean much to Donald Trump that a bunch of Americans are being forced to work without paychecks,” Kimmel said. “But I know what does matter to you. I know what you care about down to the bottom of your Kentucky-fried little heart. And that is golf.”

Kimmel suggested to the president that he give up on funding a border wall and simply reopen the government so he can hit the links again.

“With one crazy zigzag stroke of your executive Sharpie, you could be back on the greens at Mar-a-Lago, faster than you can say ‘Pocahontas.’ You’ll be right back out there eating club sandwiches and bossing caddies around with the boys. It’s a win-win, for us and for you. The federal employees can go back to work, you can get back to doing what you do best: cheating at golf. It’s good for you, and it’s good for America. We need you out on the golf course as much as possible — to keep from you doing things! So think about it. Let’s play our way out of the rough together.” — JIMMY KIMMEL

Nancy Pelosi, the speaker of the House, asked Trump on Wednesday to either delay or cancel his State of the Union address amid the shutdown. She suggested that he could submit his remarks in writing, rather than delivering them to Congress. Both Stephen Colbert and James Corden saw a problem with that idea.

“Now, pointing out that until Woodrow Wilson was president, presidents didn’t give the State of the Union in person, Pelosi gave Trump the option to deliver it in writing. Really? In writing? Have you seen how this guy spells? He’s just going to tweet, ‘The Stat of our Uniom is … STRANG!’” — STEPHEN COLBERT

“Pelosi did say Trump can submit a written version of his speech, which is pretty strategic on her part. She’s going right for his biggest handicap: spelling.” — JAMES CORDEN

Chris Christie announced that he would release a memoir about his experiences in Trump’s inner circle. The title is “Let Me Finish: Trump, the Kushners, Bannon, New Jersey and the Power of In-Your-Face Politics.” Colbert and Seth Meyers both had some fun with that.

“Former New Jersey governor Chris Christie is releasing a memoir later this month titled ‘Let Me Finish.’ Oh, you haven’t seen your approval ratings lately? You’re finished.” — SETH MEYERS

“His book chronicles his time in Trump’s inner circle, and it’s called ‘Let Me Finish.’ And how dare you suggest that the original title was ‘Are You Gonna Finish That?’ Shame on you! Shame on you for thinking that!’” — STEPHEN COLBERT

“Netflix just announced they will be raising subscription prices by up to $2 a month. Yeah, I know, this is awful news for the person whose account you use.” — JAMES CORDEN

“The federal government has been closed for 26 days, and experts say the shutdown could cause the economy to shrink. Then the president said, ‘No, it’s only shrinking cause it’s cold outside.’” — JIMMY FALLON

“The C.E.O. of Delta said the shutdown has already cost the airline $25 million. He’s not that worried, because they’ll make it all back if two people pay to check their bags.” — JIMMY FALLON

Baker Mayfield of the Cleveland Browns is a sensational young quarterback. But surely you’ve been wondering whether he’s also good at identifying objects by nuzzling them. Fear not, here’s your chance to find out.

Jimmy Fallon is known for playing games on his show. But they’re not usually like this.

Roy Wood Jr., a correspondent on “The Daily Show,” will decamp to Fallon’s show, where he’ll be a guest on Thursday.

Another “Daily Show” correspondent, Jaboukie Young-White, has caught the attention of our critic: He’s a young comic with a veteran’s talents, Jason Zinoman writes.

Plus, Ideas for What to Watch Tonight:

The Best Movies and TV Shows New to Netflix, Amazon and More in January

The 20 Best TV Dramas Since ‘The Sopranos’

Seven TV Shows That Are Perfect for Multitasking

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Thirty-three years since Jack Nicklaus won the Masters at age 46, he remains the oldest claimant of the Green Jacket and perhaps only Phil Mickelson among this year's competitors is a realistic chance to break the Golden Bear's mark.

But 61-year-old Bernhard Langer thinks that sooner or later a grey-haired older player will win a major, perhaps even the Masters.

Nicklaus showed what is possible not just by winning here in 1986 but by going close 12 years later in what would have been a victory of historic proportions.

He was in contention until the final few holes before eventually finishing equal sixth, four shots back of winner Mark O'Meara.

But for all the talk of the value of experience at Augusta National, it has been an exception rather than the rule for players over 50 to contend for the Green Jacket.

Spaniard Miguel Jimenez finished fourth in 2014, three months after his 50th birthday, while the performance of Langer that same year was also impressive as he finished equal eighth at age 56.

Langer, never a particularly long hitter even in his prime, says the length of Augusta National eventually catches up with him over 72 holes.

He thinks a longer hitter is more likely to crack the code, someone who can still almost match distance with the young bucks from the tee.

"It's a lot harder for me now than 20-30 years ago," 1985 and 1993 champion Langer told Reuters.

"The course has gotten longer. The last few years I'm wearing out my three and four-iron and two-hybrid into these par-fours, whereas these young guys are hitting eight-irons. 

"It's just hard to compete when you have that disadvantage."

Langer gets a sobering baptism these days right off the bat at the par-four first, which now stretches to 445-yards. 

When the hole plays into a cool north-westerly headwind, his drive invariably longs on the upslope, leaving him so far from the green that he has a blind second shot.

"I can't even see the flag (sometimes)," he said.

Not even meticulous course management and a consistent putting stroke can make up for the 50 yards or more head start that he is giving younger players off the tee.

Even if his chances of winning are gone, Langer reckons someone of the ilk of 1992 champion Fred Couples or 2000 winner Vijay Singh stands a better chance of winning in his 50s.

Though he is not yet 50, Mickelson at age 48 and already a winner on the PGA Tour at Pebble Beach this year is a definite threat.

This week's field will include seven players aged 50 or older.

"Someone who is 20 yards longer than me, I think they still have a chance," Langer said.

 (Reporting by Andrew Both in Cary, North Carolina; Editing by Christian Radnedge)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

LOS ANGELES — Matt Kuchar had heard enough. Battered by criticism that he had essentially stiffed a caddie who helped him win a tournament last November in Mexico, he took action to make amends on Friday, issuing a statement in which he apologized for his initial actions and also said he had now paid the caddie a good deal more money.

In the 15-line statement, which was released while he was playing the rain-delayed first and second rounds of the Genesis Open in Los Angeles, Kuchar said he had now given the caddie, David Giral Ortiz, a much bigger sum than the $5,000 he originally paid him after capturing the first-place prize of $1.296 million at the Mayakoba Golf Classic.

In issuing the statement, Kuchar clearly hoped to put an end to the bad tidings that had sullied his image and cast him as a tone-deaf American with a let-them-eat-cake attitude.

“Golf is a game where we call penalties on ourselves,” Kuchar said in the statement. “I should have done that long ago and not let this situation escalate.”

The statement did not specify how much more Kuchar had sent Ortiz’s way, but it appears an additional $45,000 was paid out.

Ortiz had been asking for a total of $50,000, according to Marc Graubart, a Houston businessman working on the caddie’s behalf, and Kuchar, in his statement, said Ortiz had now been paid what he was seeking.

Kuchar’s apology came at the end of a trying week for him, and after a challenging first round on Friday at the Riviera Country Club, where he heard the usual genial chants of “Kooooch” from some of his fans but also a number of barbs from others about his perceived parsimony.

Kuchar, 40, has earned more than $45 million as a professional golfer, but his problems began when he won a tournament in Playa del Carmen, Mexico, that he had basically entered on a whim.

In a typical PGA Tour arrangement, a caddie receives a flat rate of $1,500 for a tournament, which helps cover expenses, and a bonus worth 10 percent of the golfer’s winnings. For Ortiz, a local caddie who is also known as El Tucan, that would have amounted to about $130,000.

Instead, Ortiz told Michael Bamberger of Golf.com, he and Kuchar had agreed on a $3,000 payment plus an unspecified amount of whatever money Kuchar won at the tournament.

Kuchar, meanwhile, said he had promised Ortiz $1,000 if he missed the cut, $2,000 if he made the cut, $3,000 for a top-20 finish and $4,000 for a top-10 finish, with no specifications for how much more he would pay Ortiz if he finished first.

Which Kuchar proceeded to do, ending a four-year winless drought. At that point, Kuchar gave Ortiz $5,000 — the $4,000 he said they had agreed upon for the top-10 finish and a $1,000 bonus. Kuchar confirmed that total to Golf.com and added, “For a guy who makes $200 a day, a $5,000 week is a really big week.”

But the tone and content of that comment were quickly pounced on, particularly by people from outside the insular world of golf. And some golf fans weren’t too pleased by Kuchar’s attitude, either. As Kuchar walked down the first fairway on Friday morning, one fan stopped walking and shouted in Kuchar’s direction. “Frugal, just frugal,’’ the fan yelled. “I pay my caddie more.”

The fan, Brent Weiss, who described himself as a kindergarten teacher, said Kuchar had been his favorite player. But not anymore.

“How do you tip a caddie $1,000 when you’ve made $1.3 million?” Weiss said. “To me, I think that’s called discrimination.”

Weiss added, “I can’t even look at the guy.”

Not surprisingly, Kuchar also found himself the target of increasing indignation on social media.

In his statement on Friday, Kuchar, who is considered one of the more affable players on the tour, said he viewed his initial comments in defense of the $5,000 payment as “out of touch and insensitive.”

“They made it seem like I was marginalizing David Ortiz and his financial situation, which was not my intention,’’ the statement added. “I read them again and cringed. That is not who I am and not what I want to represent.”

Kuchar declined to comment as he walked off the course on Friday. When play was halted for the day, he still had five holes to complete in the second round.

A nine-time Tour winner, Kuchar serves as a brand spokesman for several companies, including Skechers shoes, Bridgestone Golf and Royal Bank of Canada. Before turning professional in 2000, Kuchar, who had starred at Georgia Tech, worked for a year as an investment banker.

Ortiz, a father of two, lives in a rented house and takes the bus to his job at the golf course. And the fact that he was paid only $5,000 by Kuchar might not have become as widely known as it did were it not for the efforts of Graubart, who regularly employs Ortiz during golf vacations in Mexico.

In a telephone interview on Thursday, Graubart said he happened to be with Ortiz in Mexico last month when questions about how much Kuchar had paid him surfaced. They saw Kuchar on television during a tournament in Hawaii, telling reporters that he had paid Ortiz more than $3,000 for his services but less than 10 percent of his total earnings.

Graubart said he then quizzed Ortiz about the details of his unwritten agreement with Kuchar. At which point, Graubart said, he explained the typical pay scale to Ortiz, who seemed unaware that he could have earned more money.

Graubart said he and a friend helped Ortiz write emails to Kuchar’s agent, Mark Steinberg, requesting more compensation. In a Jan. 23 email, which The New York Times obtained, Ortiz wrote that he had asked Kuchar for a percentage of his first-place check if he were to win. The existence of the emails was first reported by Golf.com.

“Matt said ‘sure’ with a smile,” Ortiz wrote in the email, “not believing that he would actually win the tournament.”

A few days later, Graubart said, Ortiz received an offer of $20,000 from a tournament director who appeared to be acting on behalf of Kuchar’s agent. But Graubart said Ortiz had requested $50,000, and the caddie then wrote an email asking if he could deal directly with Steinberg, who replied: “I am out of the country. What Matt has offered is fair.”

Some golf fans clearly disagreed. A GoFundMe account had been set up on Ortiz’s behalf and late on Thursday night, the total had reached $2,226.

But Kuchar had a significant change of heart, and now Ortiz has a lot more than that in his bank account.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Field Level Media

Matt Kuchar shot a bogey-free six-under-par 66 to extend his lead in the Sony Open on Saturday at Waialae Country Club in Honolulu.

He’ll go into Sunday’s final round at 18-under 192 with a two-shot edge over Andrew Putnam, whose strong start allowed him to tie for the lead early in the third round.

The 40-year-old Kuchar was three-under on the front side and regained the top spot. He ended the round with six consecutive pars.

Kuchar will aim for his second championship in about two months after winning the Mayakoba Golf Classic in November in Mexico.

Kuchar opened with consecutive rounds of 63 this week. He excelled with the irons again Saturday, leaving himself birdie putts of reasonable length.

Putnam pulled even with Kuchar with three birdies in the first five holes. He had a shot for another birdie on No. 6, but his chip from the fringe sat just outside the cup. That would have made for birdies on three consecutive holes.

Keith Mitchell and Chez Reavie share third place at 14-under. Mitchell played a bogey-free round of 63, including four straight birdies on Nos. 7-10.

Reavie (66), who had three eagles Friday, was five-under through nine holes of Saturday’s round. Then he went through a three-over stretch from Nos. 11-13 before regrouping for two birdies the rest of the way.

Bryson DeChambeau made a move with 63, tying his best score on the PGA Tour. He opened the round with birdies on each of the first three holes.

He’s among a cluster of golfers at 11-under.

Corey Conners, Davis Love III, Charles Howell III, Dominic Bozzelli and Brian Stuard will all begin the final round tied at 11-under. They all checked in with 64s.

Hudson Swafford (67), Ted Potter Jr. (68) and Marc Leishman (68) are also in the bunch at 11-under.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

(Reuters) - Ko Jin-young joined the long list of South Korean LPGA major champions on Sunday with a three-shot victory over compatriot Lee Mi-hyang at the ANA Inspiration in Rancho Mirage, California.

Ko, last year's Rookie of the Year, overcame a late wobble in the final round to became the fifth Korean to win the event after Grace Park (2004), Yoo Sun-young (2012), Park In-bee (2013) and Ryu So-yeon (2017).

She is the 15th woman from South Korea to win a major, the most of any country other than the United States, and the victory is projected to see her top the world rankings.

"I had a great round and a great week. I felt nervous today but I just tried to keep myself calm," said Ko.

After her lead had been reduced to one shot with three holes to play following two quick bogeys Ko responded like a true champion, a perfectly-judged 10-foot birdie putt at the 16th proving the decisive blow at Mission Hills .

She clinched in style with another birdie at the last for a two-under-par 70, bursting into tears when the putt fell.

"My caddie told me on the 18th that I had a two-shot lead and to not worry, just enjoy it," Ko said.

"So many Korean players had a great tournament, and it's a real honor for me to win."

Ko finished at 10-under 278, while Lee carded 70 for second place on seven-under, a shot ahead of American Lexi Thompson (67).

Kim In-kyung, who started the day in second place, fell out of contention with a double-bogey at the 11th, where her ball got stuck up a tree, forcing her to take a penalty stroke.

She shot 74 and tied for fourth with Spaniard Carlota Ciganda, five shots behind Ko.

The 23-year-old Ko said she had been dreaming of winning the event for five years and had always wanted to make the traditional winner's jump into Poppie's Pond.

"I always think about when I can go in that pond," she said. "That's today."

Despite the distractions and pressure of leading a major on a Sunday, Ko said she got over the line by trusting her swing.

"I just focused on my swing, on the putting, that's why I win this week," she said.

"I won. I can believe it now."

 (Reporting by Andrew Both in Cary, North Carolina; Editing by Peter Rutherford)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

AUSTIN, Tex. — Rory McIlroy never trailed in his first three matches at Austin Country Club, advancing to the round of 16 at the World Golf Championships match-play event without having to play the 17th or 18th holes. He was looking to extend his front-running ways in an elimination match against Tiger Woods, whose superlative career has been a sucker pin that McIlroy recently decided to stop taking dogged aim at.

McIlroy, 29, has 15 PGA Tour titles, including four majors, which makes him the leader of the men’s 20-something set but far behind a pre-30-year-old Woods’s pace of 46 PGA Tour titles, including 10 majors.

McIlroy came into this week as perhaps the hottest player in the men’s game, with six top-six finishes in his first six starts in 2019, including a victory at the Players Championship. But unlike Woods, whose stated goal when he was McIlroy’s age was to win every time he played, McIlroy spoke earlier in the week of the likelihood that he would fail since he wins less than 10 percent of his starts. With odds like that, McIlroy has learned to measure success in other ways, like framing the struggles as growth opportunities and accentuating the positives.

McIlroy had never faced Woods, 43, in match play, and he clearly had no idea how quickly the conditions could change from warm to chilly. There was the rain and wind that blew in on the back nine, which was forecast. But McIlroy ought to also have been prepared to face an opponent, in Woods, who was a dispassionate adversary intent on making putts, not conversation.

McIlroy’s easy familiarity is with Woods, the friend and mentor. He sometimes practices with Woods, his South Florida neighbor, and he and his family regularly dine at the restaurant that Woods owns. McIlroy’s last two major victories came in 2014, the year of Woods’s worsening back problems, which led to four operations and two essentially lost seasons.

So as McIlroy’s stature was growing, he got only glimpses of Woods, the foe and mentalist whose competitive fire often reduced his would-be rivals to ash.

On Saturday, a sizable congregation of early-rising Woods worshipers watched a match of dueling personalities — Woods’s intensity versus McIlroy’s inclusivity. In the end, the edge belonged to Woods, whose 2-and-1 victory slowed McIlroy’s momentum as he rolls into Augusta for the Masters in two weeks.

In the afternoon quarterfinals, Lucas Bjerregaard sent Woods packing with a 1-up defeat, which Woods described as a snag in his pre-Masters preparation. “I was really hoping to play Sunday,” he said, referring to the semifinals and final.

Woods’s match against McIlroy, which ended when Woods drained a 15-foot par putt to halve the par-3 17th hole, began to turn on the par-4 fifth when McIlroy had an 8-foot birdie putt to go 1-up. He backed away from the attempt and waited for more than a minute while the players on an adjacent fairway hit their shots. The pause gave McIlroy plenty of time to think about the putt, which he then missed.

Funnily enough, McIlroy might have been one of the few people at the hole who was aware that there were others in action. This was Woods’s first appearance as a professional in Austin, and fans flocked to watch him play as if he may never again come their way.

McIlroy tried to draw Woods into casual conversation early in the match only to have his attempts peter out like short putts. They did not talk during a lengthy delay on the fifth tee while they waited for the fairway to clear. McIlroy idly bounced a ball several times on the face of his driver. Woods took his ball, placed it between his right index and middle fingers and flipped it in the air and caught it between the same two fingers, a sequence he repeated several times.

McIlroy missed a 3-footer to lose the 10th hole, extending Woods’s lead to 3-up. But as the weather turned, so, too, did the momentum. As the wind began to whip and a cold rain started to fall, McIlroy won the 12th and 13th holes with his first birdies of the day. The match looked as if it might be getting away from Woods when he hit his drive at the par-4 15th way left, where water lurked. But his ball bounced off someone or something and came to rest in grass trampled down by fans. After a great third shot, Woods sank a nervy 8-footer to match McIlroy’s par.

If Woods’s putter hurt McIlroy’s comeback hopes, the final blow was self-inflicted. On the par-5 16th, McIlroy’s drive traveled 395 yards. He was in the fairway, 173 yards from the pin, and somehow made what amounted to a 7 on the hole. With Woods on the green in three, McIlroy produced his worst swing of the day. The ball landed in the rough near the lip of a greenside bunker, and he pitched his next shot over the green as fans in the vicinity scattered.

The ball came to rest against a wooden bulkhead, and McIlroy took an unplayable lie, leading to Woods winning the hole without having to hit a putt. McIlroy was muttering to himself as he walked to the 17th tee, but after Woods ended the match on the 17th green, McIlroy had nothing to say.

He hopped into a cart and left the grounds without talking to reporters. It was a rare fit of pique from McIlroy, who has worked hard over the past year to moderate his emotions no matter what score he cards.

Had McIlroy learned from his loss to Woods that constraint can feed a competitor’s fire? It would appear not. In an Instagram post later in the day, McIlroy apologized for his abrupt departure and added that he would “learn and move on.”









Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Golf is all about how you react when you get a bad bounce.

By Thomas L. Friedman

Opinion Columnist

Although my day job is writing the foreign affairs column for The New York Times — more Persian Gulf than fairway golf — thinking about golf and playing as often as I can is my all-consuming hobby. So like millions of others, I was awed by Tiger Woods’s comeback for the ages by his winning the Masters at 43 years old. What can be learned from it?

It’s hard for nongolfers to appreciate the scope of Tiger’s physical and psychological achievement, after he went through four back surgeries and the global tabloid exposure of his industrial-scale marital cheating.

If I think of the news I normally cover, it would be as if Bill Clinton came back and defeated Donald Trump for president in 2020. Or, in technology, it’s the equivalent of Steve Jobs founding Apple, losing Apple and then coming back and winning all four “technology majors’’ — the Apple desktop, laptop, iPhone and iPad — with a reborn Apple.

The biggest takeaway for me is the reminder of the truism that golf is the sport most like life, because it is played on an uneven surface and everything is on you. So good and bad bounces — and self-inflicted mistakes — are built into the game. And so much of success in golf, as in life, is about how you react to those good and bad bounces. Do you quit? Do you throw your club? Do you cheat? Do you whine? Do you blame your caddie?

Or do you say what the greatest golfers say when a bounce turns against them or their ball ends in a divot in the middle of the fairway and only a great shot will get them back into the hole? They all say to their caddie the same two words: “Watch this.” And then they pull off a remarkable shot that winds through the trees, over the hill and past the sand trap, avoids the pond on the left and lands right in the middle of the putting green — which is exactly the shot Tiger hit on the 11th hole out of the trees at Augusta National on Sunday.

To do that under pressure is stunning, but it is not just luck or even pure physical attributes. It is about practice — hours and hours and hours. Gary Player liked to say, “The more I practice the luckier I get.” And that is where, for me, the meaning of Tiger’s comeback begins: his willingness to commit to endless hours of physical rehabilitation and then endless hours of practice. How many of us have that iron will? But the physical part is the least of it.

Last year I wrote the foreword to a golf instruction book by my teacher, in which I argued that what makes golf so difficult — but also so satisfying when you get it right — is that you have to combine four things: physics, geometry, geography and psychology. Tiger’s genius on Sunday, and so often throughout his career, is his ability to master all four better than anyone else.

How so? Well, every golf swing always starts with a geography quiz: How far away is that target and how is it set in the landscape? Is it elevated? Is it on a ledge? Is it in a bowl? Is it by an ocean cliff, a stream or a pond?

Then comes the geometry lesson: At what angle and speed do I have to launch this little white ball to match, or take advantage of, this geography and get as close as possible to the hole, taking into account the wind and temperature and landscape as well?

Then comes the physics lesson: How do I move my arms and legs and shift my weight — and at what speed, torque, size of backswing, ball position and swing finish — to ensure that my little white ball solves this geography-geometry riddle and lands as close as possible to my target?

And, finally, what emotional and psychological mind-set do I need to increase the odds that my body and arms will move into the ideal launch positions — to achieve the geography-geometry solution that I’ve designed in my head. As any golfer will tell you, there is no greater buzz in the world than solving that puzzle with your body and watching your golf ball soar toward its intended target with the perfect geometry against the backdrop of some stunning geography.

Tiger did that several times Sunday, and you could feel the buzz, and none more intensely than on Augusta National’s perilous 16th hole, where he launched his ball on the perfect arc over the water, softly curbing right to left with the terrain and then landing in the precise two-foot-diameter circle so that it would then roll 20 feet down the slope and stop 15 inches below the hole. Geography, geometry, physics and psychology all working in perfect unison.

You cannot overestimate the psychological aspect of that shot. Golf is such a head game, and if you are distracted by something, you’ll never put the geography, geometry and physics together at the level needed to win in professional golf. That’s why Tiger’s game deteriorated so far after his infidelities had been broadcast all over the world in 2009, and even before his back gave out. You could actually see it when Tiger walked through a golf gallery back then. His eye never wanted to meet those of his fans, because he knew that they knew that he knew that they knew that he’d been a first-class jerk.

What was in his head translated into his hands, and it translated into his scores. For the better part of a decade, he could not win a major until his back was healed and he got the monkey of his own misdeeds off his back — by becoming a good father and a better person to his fans and his fellow golfers. You could see him looking everyone in the eye in the last couple of years, and it finally unlocked his fan base. It gave them permission to root for him again, full-throated, despite all the ways he’d disappointed them. And that clearly unlocked his mind, and I am sure his body, too, so he could swing freely again.

And that leads to another way that golf is so much like life. Each and every round is a journey, and, like all of life’s journeys, it’s never a straight line. It’s always full of crazy bounces, self-inflicted mistakes and unexpected detours, and therefore always a journey of discovery about yourself and your playing partners. And, if you love the game, it’s an everlasting journey in search of self-improvement — always trying to get your geography, geometry, physics and psychology in perfect alignment.

And when you see it done at the highest level, on the toughest terrain, under the most intense spotlight by someone who had it, lost it and then got it back, you can only say: “What a privilege! I saw Tiger make his comeback and win the Masters at age 43. What a crazy, wonderful, amazing journey!”

The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

Thomas L. Friedman is the foreign affairs Op-Ed columnist. He joined the paper in 1981, and has won three Pulitzer Prizes. He is the author of seven books, including “From Beirut to Jerusalem,” which won the National Book Award.  @tomfriedman • Facebook 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

AUGUSTA, Ga. — As Patrick Reed surveyed his second shot, he seemed to have a dozen worries on his mind.

Which way was the wind blowing? Where on the green should he land his ball? Would the fans in his peripheral vision stop moving?

In a sport where the ball is still and the mind is active, and where distractions from unruly fans, bad bounces or sudden gusts of wind abound, focus can be difficult to maintain. But during the first round of the 2018 Tour Championship in Atlanta, it became nearly impossible. Reed took one last look at his target and what he saw nearly made his head go haywire.

Why was his estranged father standing behind the green?

No one on the PGA Tour these days has his powers of concentration tested as much as Reed, whose sometimes brash personality generates intense reaction among his peers and the public alike. For every person like the two-time major winner Curtis Strange, who said that he admires Reed’s self-belief, there are dozens who will never forgive him for proclaiming himself “a top-five player in the world” when he was 23 years old and ranked No. 20.

Yet easily the worst distraction that Reed faces any week, but especially this one, when he will defend the Masters title he won last year, is the possibility that at any moment he will look up and come face-to-face with the most painful chapter of his life.

Reed’s parents live six miles from Augusta National Golf Club, in a two-story, Southern-style Colonial replete with a bedroom shrine to their first child and only son, who hasn’t stepped foot in the house since 2012. This week should be a joyous homecoming for Reed, who led Augusta State (now Augusta University) to back-to-back national championships and will preside over Tuesday’s legends-laden Champions dinner. But instead it has all the makings of a nightmare, with his acrimonious relationship with his family threatening to become as much a part of this year’s Masters narrative as his attempt to become the first golfer since Tiger Woods in 2002 to successfully defend his title.

“I wouldn’t at all be surprised if they show up,” Reed said.

Reed, 28, has steadfastly declined to speak publicly about the reasons for the family schism. In a Sports Illustrated story in 2015, Reed’s mother insinuated that the rift resulted from Reed’s marriage, at age 22, to the former Justine Karain, against the advice of his parents who worried that he was too young.

Reed’s parents were not invited to last year’s Masters, when their son held off a challenge from Rickie Fowler and Jordan Spieth down the stretch, just as they were not invited to his 2012 wedding. They have not met either of his two young children. To attend this week’s tournament, they will have to enter the grounds with badges they did not obtain from him.

Last year the drama was confined to the course, but in the year since, Reed said he knew of two occasions in which his father and younger sister, Hannah, followed him at golf tournaments. Their motivation remains a mystery. When contacted for this article, Reed’s parents politely declined to comment. In an email, Reed’s mother replied, “At this time we have no comment on this subject and we hope you will respect the privacy of Hannah, Bill and myself.”

Danny Coulson, a former deputy assistant director of the F.B.I. who directs the PGA Tour’s security, saw Reed’s father at the first of the two events where Reed also noticed him, last September’s Tour Championship at Atlanta’s East Lake Golf Club. Coulson said he had cordially explained to Bill Reed what he and his staff have expressed over the years to Patrick: If Reed’s father wishes to watch golf, he is free to do so unless he does or says anything that would warrant his ejection.

Reed had other guests at the Tour Championship. He is extremely close to the Karains. One of Justine’s brothers, Kessler Karain, is his caddie and another of her brothers, Dan Karain, was visiting from Texas to lend his support. Justine stayed home in Houston that week, but from his spot in the gallery, Dan Karain was the first to recognize Reed’s father and sister behind East Lake’s fifth green as Reed was preparing to hit.

Reed said afterward that he wasn’t aware that his father and sister were there until the par-4 17th hole, when he was sizing up his approach shot and he noticed them standing along the rope line behind the green. He said he immediately tried to steer his focus back to golf.

Reed was wild off the tee that day, hitting only six fairways, but later said his problems were strictly self-inflicted. If he had noticed his father and sister on the front nine, he said, “I would have called for security to throw them out.” But those were his emotions boiling over after a round so frustrating that he went straight to the range after signing his scorecard and hit dozens of balls.

The week after the Tour Championship, Reed’s father and sister made the 4,300-mile trek to Paris for the Ryder Cup, where they followed Reed during his Sunday singles victory. Reed never saw them, he said, but members of his inner circle did, and they said they spent the afternoon tracking both Reed’s play and Bill and Hannah’s movements. As the Americans’ upset loss to the Europeans was winding down, only a few people close to Reed knew about the drama unfolding outside the gallery ropes.

Reed acknowledged later that he understands intellectually that if his father, mother or sister wants to watch him play, there is nothing he can do about it.

The Masters spectator’s guide has clear rules for patrons: No cheering a player’s misfortune and no inane or profane outbursts. Any violators are subject to immediate removal. But no rules exist to address a player’s estranged parents following their son.

At the 2014 United States Open in Pinehurst, N.C., Reed’s parents attended the second round using badges they had obtained from friends. Upon spotting them in Reed’s gallery, Reed’s agent expressed concerns to the U.S.G.A. security officers. On Monday, the U.S.G.A., in response to questions from The New York Times about the incident, said its security officials opted to escort Reed’s parents off the course and confiscate their badges after local law enforcement officers observed Bill Reed making what they described as “intimidating movements” toward Reed’s wife.

“Patrick and Justine Reed had no involvement in this decision,” the U.S.G.A. said.

Phillip B. Costa Jr., the manager and lawyer for Team Reed Enterprises, said that Reed had not reached out to Augusta National officials to request any special security this week.

Reed knows his on-course persona makes him a convenient villain. He is the cocky player who speaks his mind and walks the course leading with his chin, the former college delinquent whose underage drinking and other immature behavior, which hastened his departure from Georgia after one year, continues to trail him as a pro.

Rory McIlroy, who lost to Reed in a riveting singles match at the 2016 Ryder Cup and was paired with — and outplayed by — Reed in the final round of last year’s Masters, said: “The negative perception is all from hearsay, it’s all secondhand. I truly believe you can only base and judge someone’s character on how they’ve treated you. And Patrick’s always treated me well.”

McIlroy added, “He’s got a bit of an edge, and I think you need that to be successful out here.”

At a tournament in Germany last year, Reed called out a television crew member for jiggling coins as he was preparing to hit. At a playoff event outside Boston, Reed posed for a selfie at a Red Sox game and posted it to his Twitter feed criticizing his PGA Tour-issued seats — from which he had a crystal-clear view of his peer Justin Thomas, another major winner in his 20s, throwing out the first pitch.

And at the end of last year’s Ryder Cup, Reed even questioned the pairing decisions of Jim Furyk, the American captain.

“Does he ask for a little bit of it?” Dustin Johnson, who was a squad mate of Reed’s in Paris, said in reference to the fans’ vitriol. “Yeah,” said Johnson, who added that he likes Reed. “But I promise you, he doesn’t care what people say.”

Well, maybe a little. The Monday after last year’s Players Championship, Reed spoke with Ross Berlin, the tour’s senior vice president for player relations, on the putting green at the next stop on the schedule. Reed described the heckling he had endured at the tour’s flagship event, which included taunts like, “Everybody hates you, Reed!” Berlin listened intently and took notes.

When Reed was finished, Berlin promised that the tour’s security would do a better job rooting out the unruliest fans. He reminded Reed that he can have fans ejected, and offered as examples two players — McIlroy and Thomas — who have done so.

Reed thanked him but said he couldn’t have anyone ejected from the course. The problem with being golf’s perceived villain is ejecting the bad guy is bound to make things worse, not better. “It’s pretty much a no-win situation,” Reed said.

Can Reed contend this week, given all that he is contending with? What if he arrives on Sunday at the par-3 12th, with its hourglass green, to a swirling south wind lurking behind the trees and his estranged family behind the tee?

“What will I do?” Reed asked rhetorically. “What can I do? Nothing.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Bill Pennington

AUGUSTA, Ga. — The methodical, ever calculating Bryson DeChambeau, who last week put himself through a 14-hour practice session to decipher the effect of what he called the “spin loft curve” of his wedges, was asked late Thursday to assess the final nine holes of his first round at the 2019 Masters.

DeChambeau, who birdied six of those nine holes, including the last four, responded with neither a technical term nor a scientific one.

“Magical,” he said.

On a favorable weather day that produced 28 rounds under par, DeChambeau was one the last competitors on the Augusta National Golf Club grounds, and he played as if enchanted by a spell.

His last full shot to the 18th hole seemed destined to roll into the hole for an eagle until the flagstick deflected it away. DeChambeau instead tapped in from about 2 inches for a final, stress-free birdie, which gave him a six-under-par 66 and tied him for the lead with Brooks Koepka.

It was just the ninth competitive Masters round for DeChambeau, 25, and the first time he had recorded a score in the 60s. In the past, DeChambeau freely conceded that he felt uncertain in the sanctified setting of golf’s most tradition-laden event.

But on Thursday, DeChambeau showed a newfound maturity.

“It was understanding how to control certain emotions on the golf course,” he said. “Just from a nerve perspective, being comfortable in different situations and being able to say, ‘I can do this, this is not a problem.’”

DeChambeau was far from the only top golfer firing away at greens softened by rain earlier in the week.

Koepka also surged late in his round to remind the field, should anyone forget, that he had won three of the last seven major championships, two of them with record scores.

Asked about that, Koepka, 28, said evenly: “I enjoy the big stage. That’s what you’re remembered for.”

One stroke off the lead was Phil Mickelson, who had two bogeys and five birdies on the back nine.

The 48-year-old Mickelson seemed rejuvenated by his round of 67, which matched his score from the final round of last year’s tournament, when he finished in a tie for 36th.

“But this was a lot of fun,” a smiling Michelson said Thursday. “It was great.”

Dustin Johnson, the world’s second-ranked golfer, and Ian Poulter were two strokes behind the leaders.

For most of the early part of the round, the focus was on Tiger Woods, who was tied for the lead with only a few holes left in his first round.

Woods’s surge had the Augusta National galleries in full throat, especially after he made an improbable birdie from the thick trees left of the 14th hole to keep his name atop a leaderboard stocked with many of the world’s top golfers.

“Not a bad start,” Woods said later.

He could not, however, maintain all of the momentum he had built. After Woods missed the green with his approach shot at the par-4 17th hole, his par putt hung on the edge of the cup for a bogey that brought a groan from the crowd circling the green.

Still, Woods finished with his usual flair. After his tee shot at the final hole trickled into a bunker, Woods lofted an iron shot that ascended the intimidating, steep uphill 18th hole and dropped pin high for an easy par.

Woods finished with a 70, the same first-round score he had when he won the tournament in 1997, 2001 and 2002. (Woods shot a first-round 74 in his other Masters championship in 2005, which was also the last time he won the tournament.)

Although Woods, after his round, was under the impression he had shot 70 in the first round of each of this Masters victories.

“I’ve shot this number and won four coats, so hopefully I can do it again,” he said, referring to the green jacket awarded Masters winners.

Irrespective of that bit of misremembering, Woods was buoyed by his round. Minutes after it concluded, he had moved past the disappointment of the bogey on the penultimate hole.

“I feel very good,” he said. “I played well and I controlled my golf ball all day. I did all the things I needed to do today to post a good number. I drove it well, hit some good iron shots, speed was good on the greens.

“I was in a position to make a couple of birdies on the front nine and missed those, but I felt confident all day. Those putts were close. Over all, I was pleased.”

At the 14th hole, after yanking his tee shot into the woods left of the fairway, he skied a short iron over the trees that settled on the green about 20 feet from the hole.

Because it was a tricky, double-breaking putt, Woods struck his next shot cautiously. In fact, he was not even trying to sink the putt.

“I was just trying to lag it down there,” Woods said. “It’s uphill and then really quick downhill, and I had a little ridge right in the line, too.”

The putt dropped into the hole, and patrons surrounding the green roared. All around Augusta National, Woods’s name vaulted up the hand-operated scoreboards, sending a buzz through the grounds.

Afterward, Woods smiled easily and seemed to enjoy the attention. But in his 22nd Masters, Woods knew how much more golf was left to play.

“We still have a long way to go,” he said. “I tee off late tomorrow, and the wind’s supposed to be up, so I have my work cut out for me the rest of the week. But so does everyone else.”

Several golfers who teed off Thursday morning, like Woods, had strong rounds, including Jon Rahm, who finished with a three-under 69. Also at three under were the former Masters champion Adam Scott and the South African Justin Harding, who was playing in his first Masters.

Harding appeared a bit awed by his first-round result.

“Yeah, I’ll take it and run if I can,” he said, then added, “Oh, wait, we’re not allowed to run here at Augusta.”

Walking only is a rule at Augusta National, for spectators and players.

“Let’s just say I’m pleased,” Harding said.

Rickie Fowler, last year’s Masters runner-up, was tied with Woods, as were eight others, including Jason Day, Gary Woodland, J. B. Holmes and Corey Conners, the winner of last weekend’s Texas Open.

The defending champion, Patrick Reed, shot 73, as did the 2017 winner, Sergio García.

An earlier version of this article misspelled the given name of one of the competitors. His name is Jon Rahm, not John.









Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Matt Stevens

An undocumented immigrant who worked at one of President Trump’s golf clubs in New Jersey for years and recently spoke out about her experience will attend his State of the Union address after being invited by her Democratic congresswoman, the woman’s lawyer and the congresswoman’s office said Wednesday.

The undocumented immigrant, Victorina Morales, had worked as a housekeeper at the Trump National Golf Club in Bedminster, N.J., since 2013, and spoke to The New York Times as part of an article published last month. The report revealed that the president’s company — the Trump Organization — was, for years, employing people at the golf club who are in the country illegally.

In a brief interview on Wednesday, Ms. Morales said that on the advice of her lawyer, she stopped going to work on Dec. 4, two days before the Times article was published. Still, the lawyer, Anibal Romero, said that neither he nor his client had received notice that she had been fired. He said Ms. Morales’s employment status with the golf club was not entirely clear.

Since leaving her job, Ms. Morales, who is from Guatemala, has campaigned for rights and fair treatment for undocumented immigrants. On Wednesday, she said she was pleased to have been invited to the State of the Union, that she has accepted the invitation and that she was “very proud because I am going to raise my voice for all of us immigrants.”

“I’m not scared to show my face,” she said, speaking in Spanish. “I am not speaking for me, I’m speaking on behalf of millions of undocumented immigrants who live in the United States.”

The congresswoman, Bonnie Watson Coleman, represents the New Jersey district in which Ms. Morales lives. The news that Ms. Morales had been invited to attend Tuesday’s State of the Union address as Ms. Watson Coleman’s guest was reported by The Washington Post on Wednesday.

“Immigrants by and large are hardworking, trustworthy and skilled people who simply want to work and build better lives here,” Ms. Watson Coleman said in a statement. “For years these kinds of people were loyal and dedicated enough to be Trump Organization employees. I hope that in his State of the Union address, Donald Trump will finally acknowledge the real face of immigrants in this country — women and children fleeing violence; law-abiding, taxpaying people who would do almost anything to be Americans. And if he can’t, I’ve invited Victorina so that he may look her in her eyes to tell his lies to a familiar face.”

The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Wednesday evening.

Mr. Trump has made border security and protecting jobs for Americans cornerstones of his presidency, and his insistence on building a border wall led to the recent partial government shutdown. He has labeled illegal immigration “a major, major problem,” and pledged to build a border wall while his administration has carried out workplace raids and payroll audits.

The Times article, published Dec. 6, said undocumented immigrants had been employed for years at the Trump National Golf Club as housekeepers, landscapers and kitchen staff. It also said they were kept on the payroll even though management was aware they had used phony documents to secure employment, as is common among undocumented immigrants.

Ms. Morales previously told The Times that a manager at Bedminster had helped her secure a new fake Social Security number and legal permanent-residency card after telling her that those on file had expired.

Since the article was published, about a dozen workers deemed ineligible to work in the United States because they lacked legal immigration status have been terminated at the Bedminster club, according to people familiar with the matter.

Another dozen were fired at the Trump National Golf Club in Westchester County, N.Y., this month, a development first reported by The Washington Post.

The Trump Organization also said late Tuesday that it was putting in place a system to weed out undocumented immigrants who try to get jobs at its properties.

“I must say, for me personally, this whole thing is truly heartbreaking,” Eric Trump, an executive vice president with the Trump Organization, said in the statement on Tuesday. “Our employees are like family, but when presented with fake documents, an employer has little choice.”

He said that hiring undocumented immigrants was not a problem unique to the Trump Organization, and that it “demonstrates that our immigration system is severely broken and needs to be fixed immediately.”

Miriam Jordan contributed reporting.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Bill Pennington

AUGUSTA, Ga. — As Tiger Woods was making his stirring late charge up a bunched Masters leaderboard Friday, he was chasing a formidable cast of rivals that included six major golf championship winners.

Any one of them could have tripped up Woods’s run at the lead as the tournament reached its halfway point.

Instead, for one alarming moment, it appeared that a stumbling security official at Augusta National Golf Club might derail Woods’s most memorable Masters surge in years.

After Woods hit a shot out of the trees left of the 14th hole, a sprinting uniformed guard, who was trying to control the crowd just behind Woods, slipped on wet grass and slammed into Woods’s right ankle. Woods recoiled and limped forward, hopping on his left foot several times before regaining his footing.

But Woods, who grimaced but never looked back, kept striding toward the green. In fact, the episode seemed to spur him to greater heights.

With the galleries around him cheering wildly, Woods birdied the 14th and 15th holes, and he had two choice opportunities in the closing holes to vault into the lead. While those birdie putts slid past the hole, Woods still managed a four-under-par 68 and a two-day score of six under that left him a shot off the tournament lead shared by five golfers.

Jason Day, Brooks Koepka, Adam Scott, Francesco Molinari and Louis Oosthuizen — all major winners — were tied at seven under.

[Read about how Jason Day is using pain to his advantage.]

After his round, Woods played down the collision with the security official.

With a smile, Woods said: “Accidents happen, and you move on. I’ve had galleries run over me. When you play in front of a lot of people, things happen. But it’s all good.”

Woods insisted he was not injured in the accident, which looked a little like a base runner trying to take out an infielder at second on a double-play attempt.

When pressed on whether he was physically sound for the Masters’ weekend rounds, Woods grinned and answered: “Yeah, other than having four knee surgeries and four back surgeries, I’m fine. Good to go.”

On a day when most of the top scores were produced by golfers teeing off in the morning, with the sun out, Woods’s ascent up the leaderboard as an evening rainstorm drenched the golf course was something of a surprise.

At one point, it seemed the poor weather could undermine Woods, as play was suspended just after he hit his tee shot to the menacing 12th green, about 5 feet behind the hole.

When play resumed 29 minutes later, Woods, who admitted he grew stiff during the delay, missed the birdie putt. Then his short birdie putt on the 13th hole stopped an inch in front of the hole’s center. At the time, Woods was stuck at four under for the tournament.

“I had a few chances go the wrong way, but I wasn’t too bummed about it because I also hit a lot of really good shots,” Woods said later. “So I was still confident.”

Indeed, Woods was at his scrambling best, reaching 16 of 18 greens in regulation despite missing half of the fairways on the 14 par-4 and par-5 holes.

He missed a 7-foot birdie putt at the 17th hole and a 15-footer at the final hole. Converting either of them would have put him in a tie for the lead.

Afterward, Woods could not resist stressing that he has now been a contender in three consecutive major golf championships, including last year’s British Open and P.G.A. Championship.

“I felt very good out there doing what I was doing, and so now this is three straight majors that I’ve been in the mix,” he said. “So it’s good stuff.”

Most of the attention early Friday was on Molinari, which was unusual because he is rarely included in the featured groupings of top golfers selected by tournament officials. And even as Molinari was shooting a bogey-free 67, he toured Augusta National largely unrecognized.

But Molinari, the reigning British Open champion, the world’s seventh-ranked golfer and a winner just last month on the PGA Tour, does not seem perturbed by the disregard.

“There’s obviously loads of great players in golf right now; I think I’m getting the attention that I deserve,” said Molinari, who played Friday with Tyrrell Hatton and Rafa Cabrera-Bello. “So I’m happy to go about my business and keep playing good golf.”

Molinari’s climb into golf’s upper echelon, however, may soon be impossible to overlook, even on American soil.

Day also shot 67 as he moved into a tie for the lead. Koepka cooled off slightly after Thursday’s round of 66, shooting 71. Scott looked as if he would have the halfway lead all to himself until his putter let him down and he bogeyed the 16th hole. Oosthuizen, who often plays well at the Masters, charged with a 33 on the back nine.

Dustin Johnson, the world’s second-ranked golfer and another major champion, finished a stroke behind the leaders along with Justin Harding, a Masters rookie from South Africa.

In the end, it was Molinari who played the most consistently, making five birdies and 13 pars.

Molinari first participated in the Masters in 2006 as the caddie for his brother, Edoardo, who qualified as the United States Amateur champion. This is his eighth go-round as a player, and it has been an arduous process to make himself comfortable at Augusta National. Molinari is 24 over par in the 26 rounds he has played, and he has shot 75 or higher eight times, including an 81 in 2013.

Even caddying for his brother was “a bit of a nightmare,” Molinari said Friday.

“It’s not great fun to caddie around here,” he said. “I can tell you that. I loved being here, but it’s just so hard.”

Slowly, Molinari has acclimated. It has not hurt that he has played the best golf of his career in the last 14 months, including a star turn at the Ryder Cup in September. Over his last four rounds at Augusta National, Molinari is 10 under par.

Most of the improvement has been in his putting on the demanding Augusta National greens, which require a precise understanding of subtle contours and topography.

Asked to describe what he had done to become a better putter, Molinari snickered.

“I’ve changed pretty much everything that you can think of,” he said, explaining that he had altered his posture, putter path and tempo. He has also changed putters and putter shape.

Molinari said his putting overhaul could have been more sweeping only if he switched from a right-handed stance to a left-handed one. He needed just 25 putts on Friday as he moved into a share of the lead.

“There’s a long way to go yet, but I’m happy and doing better than in the past here,” he said. “Hopefully I can keep doing the same.”

The world’s top-ranked player, Justin Rose, shot four over through Friday and missed the cut.









Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Golf

By Karen Crouse

PEBBLE BEACH, Calif. — The celebration was muted, even if Pebble Beach Golf Links was at its most radiant on Monday morning, with clear skies and bright sunshine casting the Pacific Ocean, the 18th hole and Phil Mickelson in an exquisite light. Mickelson turned to Paul Casey, the player he had vanquished to win his fifth Pebble Beach Pro-Am title after a lengthy weather delay, to thank him for helping produce the sublime stagecraft.

With Casey carrying a three-stroke lead into the final round, Mickelson was forced to bear down over the final 18, and he produced a seven-under 65 in the final round. Mickelson’s 72-hole total was 19-under 268, three strokes better than Casey, a friend and fellow Arizona State alumnus.

So focused was Mickelson during the last round that he tried to persuade Casey and tournament officials to finish the final two holes amid fading light Sunday evening.

Casey, who ended up winning the team event with his amateur partner, Don Colleran, declined to play on, and after they both finished with a par and birdie on the final holes in front of a robust crowd of early risers the next morning, Mickelson gave credit where it was due.

“Paul made the tough call, but it was the right decision,” Mickelson said, adding, “Sometimes I just get in my own little bubble and I don’t see the big picture.”

Mickelson’s decision-making in the caldron of competition can sometimes be a liability, as was evident in his collapse on the final hole of the 2006 U.S. Open at Winged Foot — or more recently, in his decision to one-time a moving putt during the third round of last year’s U.S. Open at Shinnecock Hills.

But in closing out his 44th PGA Tour victory this week, Mickelson, 48, was a study in restraint. After his birdie putt at the 18th hole dropped, he picked the ball out of the hole as though he were retrieving a package from his front stoop. It was Mickelson’s second victory in nearly a year — he won the World Golf Championships event in Mexico City last March — and his first on U.S. soil in 2,199 days, since he captured the 2013 Waste Management Phoenix Open.

Any victory is special at Pebble Beach, a historic venue with personal resonance for Mickelson and his family, but he hopes a more meaningful celebration on the 18th green awaits him in June, for the 119th U.S. Open — the only major tournament that Mickelson has not won.

Can he strike gold twice at Pebble Beach in the same year? Two men have proved it’s possible; Jack Nicklaus in 1972, on his way to a seven-victory season, and Tiger Woods in 2000, when he won nine PGA Tour events. Nicklaus was in his 30s in 1972 and Woods in his 20s in 2000, both at the peak of their powers.

Mickelson will turn 49 on the final day of this year’s U.S. Open, and a win would make him the oldest men’s major champion, surpassing Julius Boros, who was 48 when he won the 1968 P.G.A. Championship. Mickelson’s younger brother and caddie, Tim, suggested people discount Mickelson’s chances at their peril.

“He’s won twice now in the last 11 months,” Tim Mickelson said, adding, “Obviously it shows he can win still.”

Mickelson’s game appears to be aging as well as did the bottle of 1990 Romanée-Conti wine that he drank from the Claret Jug after winning the 2013 British Open. He has a second and a first in his last three starts — with a missed cut at the Phoenix Open sandwiched in between. The resurgence of Mickelson and the 43-year-old Woods has made the men’s game infinitely more compelling.

“I believe that if I play my best, if Tiger plays his best, it’s good enough to win on any week,” Mickelson said, adding, “I just think that both myself and Tiger are going to have a really, really good year.”

Mickelson and Woods both have found their way to the winner’s circle more recently than either Jordan Spieth or Rory McIlroy have. Like Mickelson, Spieth and McIlroy are each one major title from completing a career Grand Slam. McIlroy, 29, will get his opportunity first, at the Masters in April. Spieth’s turn will come next, at the P.G.A. Championship in May.

And then the spotlight will settle like a laser beam on Mickelson, who played his first major as a pro at the 1992 U.S. Open at Pebble Beach. He noted that this year marked the 100th anniversary of his maternal grandfather’s debut as a pre-teen caddie at Pebble Beach, where he made 25 cents a round.

During the greenside trophy presentation, Mickelson told the story of how his grandfather, Al Santos, who grew up in Monterey, Calif., dropped out of school in the fourth grade to help support his family and shortly thereafter found his way to the Pebble Beach caddie shack.

Mickelson said his grandfather carried a 1900 silver dollar in his pocket while he worked, and passed it down to Mickelson, who uses it as a ball marker whenever he plays here. Mickelson describes the place as special now, but after he missed the cut at the 1992 U.S. Open, he skipped the Tour stop here in 1993 and 1994.

“I don’t know I had a good big picture of the overall importance of the tournament to the game and what it provides and how much I love the place,” Mickelson explained in 2012.

Playing Pebble Beach has taught Mickelson to take nothing for granted. He was trailing by two strokes after 36 holes in 1996 but never got a chance to make a charge as inclement weather washed out the final two rounds. Two years later, Mickelson successfully outlasted Mother Nature and the field for his first Pebble Beach Pro-Am title.

In 1998, the tournament’s first two rounds were played in stormy weather in February, which rendered the course soft and the greens slow, and the final round took place under bright sunshine in August, and the course was fast and firm — as it should be in June for the U.S. Open. In winning his first pro-am title, Mickelson might have acquired the blueprint for realizing his last major goal in golf.

“I have such great memories here,” Mickelson said. “I would love to add to it.”

But Mickelson added that he wouldn’t allow himself to look any further ahead than the Masters. He has spent so long fixated on winning the U.S. Open, but this week taught him the beauty that can reward those who see the big picture.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Twenty-two years after Tiger Woods raised the curtain on golf’s version of the Broadway sensation “Cats,” he has set the stage for a spellbinding encore.

With a five-under-par 67 in the third round at Augusta National on Saturday, Woods positioned himself for his first major victory since 2008, on the same Augusta National stage where he stole the show in 1997 with a record-breaking 12-stroke victory in his first major as a professional.

Woods will enter the final round tied for second with Tony Finau, two strokes behind Francesco Molinari, who posted a 66 for a 54-hole total of 13-under 203.

[The wait is over. After nearly 11 years, Tiger Woods has won another major.]

In 1997, the 21-year-old Woods was a three-time United States Amateur champion who requested a winner’s green jacket that hung loosely on him because he expected to grow into it over the course of his career. Now 43, with 14 major titles and four back operations behind him, Woods is poised to do what no one — least of all, him — thought possible two years ago: continue to expand his legacy. With a victory, he would pull to three major titles behind Jack Nicklaus’s record 18.

[Read how Tiger Woods pushed his body to the point of breakdown and then came back.]

Before the 2017 Masters, Woods flew in for the Champions Dinner and spent the evening in terrible physical discomfort. So great was the pain in Woods’s lower back, he told one of his fellow diners: “I’m done. I won’t play golf again.”

On the eve of this year’s tournament, Woods touched on that tough time in a speech after he accepted the Ben Hogan Award, presented to a player who has remained active in the game despite a physical handicap or serious injury or illness. He said he required a pain-relieving shot just to make it through the dinner two years ago, and traveled from Augusta National straight to the airport, for a flight to England to consult with a back specialist, who recommended back fusion surgery.

Woods traveled to Texas that month for the operation, which he described it as “a last resort” after three less complex operations. His goal at the time, he said, was not to resume his winning ways in golf but to regain a quality of life that allowed him to play with his two children and engage in daily activities with minimal physical distress.

Before Woods returned last year for his first competitive start at Augusta National since 2015, he described himself as “a walking miracle.” Woods tied for 32nd last year, a performance that he used as a launching pad to contend at the British Open, where he tied for sixth, and the P.G.A. Championship, where he finished second. Last September, Woods won his first P.G.A. Tour title since 2013, and his 80th over all, at the Tour Championship in Atlanta, a two-hour drive from Augusta National.

If Woods is to win his fifth Masters title, he is going to have to vanquish a group of players who do not appear cowed by him. Molinari, 36, was paired with Woods in the final round of last year’s British Open and wrested the lead from him down the stretch to win his first major title.

And lurking one stroke behind Woods and Finau is Brooks Koepka, who held off Woods to win the P.G.A. Championship. Everything Woods’s younger competitors know about winning, they learned in their formative years by watching him attack courses without fear or finesse.

“He’s playing against guys that he kind of bred,” Finau said, adding: “The way he dominated and watching him growing up, it was like he was scared of nobody. So I think a lot of us try to be like him and try to be that way to where nothing on the golf course can scare us and our skills can showcase.”

Finau, 29, who is the PGA Tour’s first full-time player of Samoan and Tongan descent, watched the telecast of Woods’s 1997 victory from his family’s home in Salt Lake City. Finau, who was 7, said that when he watched Woods become the first man of color to slip on the green jacket, he was inspired to take up golf.

“I saw someone who had the same skin color as me,” Finau said in an interview last year. “As a kid, I could relate to that.”

From the time he began hitting shots into a mattress in his family’s garage, Finau fantasized about being grouped with Woods in the final round of a major. His dream will come true Sunday when he plays in the last threesome with Molinari and Woods. Masters officials moved up the tee times and decided to send the players out in threesomes instead of in pairs, and from both the first and 10th tees, because of a severe weather forecast for late Sunday afternoon. The last thing they want is for weather to play through the climactic finish to their 83rd tournament.

Woods’s resurgence has had the effect of introducing him to a generation of children who were not born when he won his most recent major title, at the 2008 United States Open. The youngsters can be forgiven for wondering what the fuss is about when they see muscled players like Koepka and Jason Day.

Woods borrowed a page on training from the 83-year-old Gary Player, the sport’s first fitness fanatic, and added a few chapters. Woods worked out as if he were a wide receiver or track and field competitor. He was determined to destroy the perception that golfers were not real athletes.

Along the way, Woods won the admiration of other superstars like the swimmer Michael Phelps, who had his first visit to the Masters on Saturday and followed Woods for some of his round. Phelps, who had only eight of his record 28 Olympic medals the last time Woods won at Augusta, could not contain his excitement.

“That was so cool!” he said.

Woods’s dominance and the muscles he sculpted through a regimen of heavy lifting increased golf’s appeal to 20-something players like Dustin Johnson and Jordan Spieth — both major winners — who were proficient at multiple sports.

Before this year’s tournament, Spieth, the 2015 champion, described Woods’s fourth victory at Augusta, in 2005, as “kind of a big reason why I fell in love with the game of golf.”

And Spieth was hardly alone. Johnson said of Woods, “He kind of made golf, you know, a cool sport to play.”

This is the fifth time in 22 Masters that Woods has stood at 11 under or better after 54 holes. The other four times, he won. Whatever happens on Sunday, Woods will be front and center, which is great for the Masters, greater for golf and greatest of all for Woods, who has come back more appreciative of his gifts and of the love showered on him by his galleries.

At the Champions Dinner on Tuesday, Player, a three-time Masters winner, casually asked Woods how he was doing. As Player recalled after taking part in the ceremonial first-shot ceremony Thursday with Nicklaus, there was nothing offhand about his reply.

“I’m not finished yet,” Woods said.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Victor Mather

The cheers were still reverberating around Augusta National after Tiger Woods’s triumph in the Masters on Sunday, but fans were already starting to look ahead. Is Woods back after a decade of injury and personal adversity? Could he, at age 43, regain the form that had him destroying fields from 1997 to 2008? Or was the comeback a kind of fool’s gold, a last hurrah before the decline sets in again?

One thing’s for sure: People will be watching. Here’s what’s next for Woods.

The wait for the second major is shorter than usual this year because the P.G.A. has been moved from its regular August date. One goal was to get the least-heralded major a little more attention. Woods’s win in the Masters has helped that cause hugely.

Woods has won four P.G.A.s, most recently in 2007. The tournament this year will be played at Bethpage Black on Long Island. The difficult Black course has never hosted the P.G.A. before, but it was the site of the U.S. Open in 2009, when Woods tied for sixth, and in 2002, when Woods won, beating Phil Mickelson by three shots.

Woods is currently listed as one of three favorites at 10-1, along with Dustin Johnson and Rory McIlroy.

The United States Open returns this year to one of the grandest sites in golf, Pebble Beach, on the Monterey Peninsula in California.

Woods has three U.S. Open victories in his career. Before Sunday, his last major win was the 2008 Open.

Pebble Beach also hosted the Open in 2010, when Woods was tied for fourth, and 2000, when he crushed the field by 15 strokes.

Woods, Johnson and McIlroy are again the three favorites for this tournament.

The British Open, or just the Open as it is called in Europe, will be headed to Royal Portrush in Northern Ireland for the first time since 1951. The course, on the North Atlantic, is expected to continue the Open’s tradition of unpredictable and challenging weather conditions.

Woods has three British Opens, with his most recent victory in 2006. He and McIlroy, who is from Northern Ireland, are the two favorites.

Woods, once an automatic fixture on the American teams for the Ryder and Presidents Cups, missed out for several years before returning to the Ryder Cup last year as a captain’s pick. He finished the event 0-4.

He was named the captain for this year’s Presidents Cup, and after his return to form, it looks as if he will be a playing captain.

Though he has been a part of American teams since 1997, Woods has at times displayed a lack of enthusiasm for team events.

The United States has won the Presidents Cup, against a team of non-European international golfers, seven straight times. This year’s event will be held in Melbourne, Australia.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Richard Goldstein

Marilynn Smith, who help found the Ladies Professional Golf Association in 1950, when the women’s game was barely a blip on the national sports scene, and went on to win 21 tour events, including two major championships, died on Tuesday in Goodyear, Ariz. She was 89.

Her death, which was announced by the L.P.G.A. on its website, left Marlene Bauer Hagge and Shirley Spork as the last survivors among the 13 pioneers of the women’s tour.

The L.P.G.A. said Smith, who would have turned 90 on Saturday, made her last public appearance on March 24 greeting players as they walked off the 18th green at the Bank of Hope Founders Cup tournament in Phoenix.

During its first season, the L.P.G.A. sponsored a dozen or so tournaments, with prize money totaling just $50,000. Babe Didrikson Zaharias, an Olympic track and field champion in 1932, and Patty Berg were the main draws at first, but Smith, as well as co-founders like Hagge, Louise Suggs and Betty Jameson, became prominent golf pros in their own right.

Last year, the L.P.G.A. sponsored 32 events in 13 countries with $65.35 million in prize money.

Smith captured the 1963 and 1964 Titleholders Championship, an L.P.G.A. major tournament of her era, which was played at Augusta Country Club in Georgia, adjacent to Augusta National Golf Club, the home of the Masters. She won her first L.P.G.A. tournament in 1954 and her last in 1972.

While serving as L.P.G.A. president from 1958 to 1960, Smith was instrumental in founding the organization’s teaching division, now known as the L.P.G.A. Teaching and Club Professional Membership. She gave clinics throughout the United States and in 37 other countries and was the first woman to be a television analyst for men’s pro golf tournaments. She worked with ABC at the 1973 United States Open, at Oakmont in Pennsylvania, and the Colonial, in Fort Worth.

She was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame in 2006.

The L.P.G.A. was the successor to the Women’s Professional Golf Association, which was founded during World War II but disbanded in 1949 after incurring financial difficulties. In the L.P.G.A.’s early years, it struggled as well, receiving little notice in the press or on the radio and having no TV exposure.

The women also lacked the funds to fly, so they traveled to tournaments in caravans of four or five automobiles when the interstate highway system was in its infancy.

When they reached a tournament site, they had to sell their product to the locals. Smith, an exuberant woman who seemed just right for publicizing the tour, was given the nickname Miss Personality for her cheerleading.

“We would go to major league ball parks, St. Louis, Cincinnati, Washington, D.C., and hit golf balls from home plate out to center field, with a 9 or an 8 iron, and then we’d get on the microphone and ask those baseball fans to come out and see the L.P.G.A. play,” she told The Arizona Republic long afterward.

The women were also the tournament directors and rules makers, and they called in results to the news agencies and newspapers. Tournament sites came and went. “We might get one event one year; the next year it was gone,” Smith told The Dallas Morning News in 2000.

Marilynn Smith was born on April 29, 1929, in Topeka, Kan., to Lynn and Alma Smith. Her father was an insurance executive.

In her pre-teenage years, Marilynn managed and pitched for a boys’ baseball team. As she once told golf.com: “I came home from pitching one day and my mother said, ‘Well, how did you do today, dear?’ I threw my mitt against the wall and I said, ‘Oh, —,’ a four-letter word beginning with S that I had learned from the boys on the sandlot. And she marched me into the lavatory and washed my mouth out with soap.”

When her father came home and learned of her outburst, she recalled, he said, “We better take her out to the Wichita Country Club and teach her a more ladylike sport.”

Her childhood dream was to play baseball for the St. Louis Cardinals, but she agreed to take golf lessons from a country-club pro. Captivated by the sport, she went on to win three state amateur championships and the 1949 national collegiate golf championship as a sophomore at the University of Kansas. She turned pro after that when the Spalding sporting goods company gave her a contract to promote its equipment at clinics.

Smith received the first Patty Berg Award for distinguished service to women’s golf in 1979. In her later years she sponsored a tournament raising scholarship money for female high school seniors planning to continue to play golf in college. Living in Goodyear, a suburb of Phoenix, she played recreationally until she was about 70, when her knees gave out. There was no immediate word on her survivors.

Smith estimated that she had given 4,000 clinics in the United States and abroad. On one of her four trips to New Zealand, she inspired a 10-year-old girl named Marilyn Smith to take up golf. In the 1970s, that Marilyn Smith became the first pro player from her country to join the L.P.G.A. Tour.

“With Marilynn Smith as a founding member still playing, they called me MJ Smith,” she once told Wellington Golf, which advises golf clubs in the vicinity of New Zealand’s capital. “Though they did send one of my prize checks to her by mistake.”

An earlier version of this obituary misstated the location in Georgia of the Titleholders Championship, which Smith won in 1963 and 1964. It was Augusta Country Club, not Augusta National Golf Club.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The New York Times

Welcome to Crossing the Border, a limited-run weekly newsletter from The New York Times. Like what you see? Send this to a friend. If someone forwarded it to you, sign up here to have the next issue delivered to your inbox.

By Manny Fernandez in Donna, Tex.

It’s springtime on the border, and that means the winter season is winding down — the months when tens of thousands of retirees from Minnesota, South Dakota, Illinois and other parts of the Midwest adopt South Texas as their home away from home.

Retirees in swimsuits ride their bicycles to the pool, bright noodles tucked under their arms like jousting lances. They line the streets for golf-cart parades. They venture into Mexico, shopping for cheap medicine, getting pedicures, undergoing low-cost dental work and sipping goblet-sized margaritas.

They are known as Winter Texans, and they concentrate mainly in the Rio Grande Valley, the temperate region deep in South Texas that is also the place where the largest number of migrants has been crossing lately from Central America — President Trump has declared a national emergency along the border and stationed Army troops to help control the escalating influx. One of their base camps was a quarter-mile from where seniors at the Victoria Palms resort in Donna deploy by the dozens to occupy five pickleball courts.

The annual invasion of Midwesterners — and a number of Canadians — has decreased in recent years, but they remain an economic and cultural force. An estimated 106,000 Winter Texans spent about $528 million in the valley in the 2017-18 winter season, according to a survey by the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley. Tex-Mex restaurants fly welcome banners for them. There are Winter Texan newspapers, age-qualified RV parks, expos, cruises, theater productions and bumper stickers — one pickup truck in the border city of McAllen had two: “Iowa Winter Texan” and “I’m retired. Go around.”

“It gets me out of the snowbanks,” said Dean Miller, 58, a resident of Detroit Lakes, Minn., who spends the winter living and working at the Winter Ranch resort in Alamo. “You’ll go to some event down here and you’ll find your neighbor from back home.”

The majority of Winter Texans are white and in their early 70s. Many of them voted for Mr. Trump in 2016, and their very presence this winter quietly subverted the president’s assertion that the border is in crisis. They have been coming to the region for years — in some cases, their parents were Winter Texans, too — and the political dynamics and national-emergency rhetoric has no effect on how, or where, they spend their retirement.

“We don’t see what you see on TV,” said Terry Goss, the general manager of Victoria Palms, one of the largest Winter Texan communities, with up to 2,500 retirees.

What do Winter Texans see, exactly?

A slice of border life that looks nothing like what many Americans think of as border life. There was Nathan’s fourth annual Sock Hop at Ranchero Village in Weslaco one Friday. There were fish frys and riverboat tours, line dancing and karaoke sessions, bluegrass acoustic jams and nondenominational church services. At the Winter Ranch resort in Alamo one Monday afternoon, the Winter Ranch Players packed the house with three one-act plays, “The Ethel and Albert Comedies.” At Victoria Palms, Mr. Goss spoke standing next to a poster listing all the sold-out shows at the resort’s ballroom, one of them a Rolling Stones tribute band concert. Victoria Palms is so popular with Canadians that a Victoria Palms reunion is scheduled most summers near Toronto.

Margaret Hitzemann, 63, who normally lives in Onamia, Minn., spent the past two months in a townhouse in Port Aransas, near Corpus Christi. One rainy afternoon, she and her husband visited the Mexican tourist town of Nuevo Progreso. They bought crispy chapulines — crickets, a fried delicacy — and went into a pharmacy to buy some cheap medicine.

“We don’t take a lot of meds, so we were thinking, ‘Oh, let’s go down and get some cheap Tylenol and Advil and that kind of thing,’” Ms. Hitzemann said. “I was like, ‘Oh my gosh, this isn’t any cheaper than Walmart.’ So we ended up not buying any medications.”

In a region with a large Latino population and tolerant attitudes toward immigration — many people have family members on both sides of the border — culture clash with the Northerners is inevitable. The study released by the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley included unedited messages from Winter Texans to local officials, and some of the sharpest comments read: “Be more American, less Mexican. This is not Mexico!” and “Have channel 5 respect Mr. Trump” and “Keep the grass cut, the trash picked up and speak English.”

Already, the exodus back north has started. The end of the season for many comes on Thursday, with the annual Winter Texan appreciation day in Nuevo Progreso.

For some, the season never ends. There are Converted Texans, former Winter Texans who settle in the valley for good. Kristi Collier, a McAllen native who runs a media and hospitality company that caters to Winter Texans called Welcome Home, Rio Grande Valley, hosts an annual Converted Texan Fiesta in April. (She leads a swearing-in ceremony.)

Among the ranks of the converted are Ken and Lois Lane, originally from Anchorage, who started spending winters at Victoria Palms in 2005. They now live there permanently in a double-wide mobile home.

“I think the cost of living here is very reasonable, compared to many other places,” said Mr. Lane, 73, a retired power dispatcher for an electrical company.

He and his wife visited Nuevo Progreso and hosted their son and his family from Iowa over spring break. The couple is in a unique category: sort of reverse Winter Texans.

“The motor home we kept and in the summer when it gets real hot, we go up north,” Mr. Lane said.

Manny is one of a team of New York Times journalists currently reporting from the border. Each week they’ll be sharing a slice of their reporting about the border and the people who spend time on both sides of it.

Do you have questions about life on the border? Or feedback about this newsletter? Email us at: crossingtheborder@nytimes.com.

“There are people out there who just say, ‘Send them all back and build a wall.’ But they would be facing empty shelves in the grocery store if that were to happen.”

— Mike McMahon, a dairy farmer in upstate New York.

The farms of upstate New York are thousands of miles from the southern border, but close enough to the northern one that the Border Patrol has jurisdiction. Farmers’ reliance on undocumented workers had made the region a focal point in the debate over the Trump administration’s border policies, leading to tensions between state politicians of both parties and the federal agents enforcing the president’s crackdown on illegal immigration.

Christina Goldbaum, an immigration reporter in The New York Times’s Metro department, explored Mr. McMahon’s story, and those of migrants who work at farms like his, in an article this week. Read more about it here.

This week, KPBS, a public radio station in Southern California, launched a new podcast, “Only Here,” about life and culture in San Diego and Tijuana — “the art, food, traditions and culture that exists because of the border,” they write. The first episode profiles a young photographer who is gay and undocumented, and you can listen to it, along with other episodes, here.

Podcast creators, like everyone else, have been drawn to stories and conversations about the border. If you prefer your stories in audio form, here are a few more to get you started:

• “The Green Line,” produced by the union of Border Patrol agents. The hosts, Art Del Cueto and Brandon Judd, are Border Patrol agents who have been supportive of President Trump’s policies — and both appeared at his side in the White House briefing room in January when he talked about declaring a national emergency to help build a border wall. (The Times has written about them before.)

• Last spring, WNYC’s Radiolab ran “Border Project,” a three-part series about a Border Patrol policy that most likely led to a rise, beginning in the late 1990s, in the number of migrants who died while crossing to the United States. It also profiles some of the migrants who made the trek despite it. Listen to all the episodes here.

• This episode of PRX’s Radio Diaries, “The Border Wall,” focuses on those strange parts of the border that one woman calls a “no-man’s land,” cut off from their country by a barrier that doesn’t always follow the line it’s meant to.

• Our very own “Daily” podcast has many great episodes from the border. Start with a two-part series, “Dispatches From the Border” (Part 1 here and Part 2 here), which follows Azam Ahmed, the Times bureau chief for Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, and other Times journalists on a trip along the nearly 2,000-mile border with Mexico. Then there’s this episode, “The Scars of Family Separation,” about a migrant father who crossed the border with his daughter. Finally, from last summer, “How Separating Migrant Families Became U.S. Policy” is an interview with Stephen Miller, a senior policy adviser who has helped the president frame his immigration policy.

Read earlier installments of Crossing the Border here. Sign up here to have the next issue delivered to your inbox.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

NAUCALPAN DE JUÁREZ, Mexico — Nine holes into his record-tying round Sunday, Justin Thomas bumped into Rory McIlroy, who was waiting to tee off on the first hole at Club de Golf Chapultepec. He said he asked McIlroy how he thought the afternoon would go.

McIlroy began the final day of the Mexico Championship four strokes behind Dustin Johnson, a deficit that was daunting but hardly insurmountable; the previous Sunday, J. B. Holmes charged from four strokes back to beat Thomas at the Genesis Open.

McIlroy told Thomas it would be hard to catch Johnson because of how well he was playing, a prediction that proved to be hit-the-flagstick accurate. Johnson, who was sixth on the PGA Tour in driving distance last year, ranked first in this week’s field in putting. It was an unbeatable combination as Johnson closed with a five-under-par 66 to finish five strokes clear of McIlroy, who posted a 67.

Johnson’s 72-hole total in this World Golf Championships event outside Mexico City was 19 under. McIlroy finished at 16 under, which would have been good enough to win each of the previous two years that the tournament was held here. On Sunday, all it got McIlroy was a five-stroke cushion over the third-place finishers: Paul Casey (65), Ian Poulter (68) and Kiradech Aphibarnrat (68).

Tiger Woods recorded a 69 to finish in a four-way tie for 10th at eight under.

“It was sort of like there was two different golf tournaments going on and I won the second one,” said McIlroy, who has posted top-five finishes in all four of his tour starts in 2019.

Thomas, who played in the first group off the back nine, took advantage of pristine greens and nonexistent pressure to record a 62, tying his year-old course record, vaulting him into ninth. His score represented a 13-stroke improvement over his final 18 last Sunday at Riviera Country Club.

“I would sure play a lot of money to switch the two,” Thomas said with a smile. “I would gladly take a 50th place this week to win last week.”

Johnson, 34, became the first player since Davis Love III in 2008 to reach 20 PGA Tour titles. “To get 20 wins out here is very difficult, and do it before I turn 35 is pretty incredible,” Johnson said, adding, “This is a big one for me, and it gives me a lot of confidence for the rest of the year.”

Johnson is not lacking for confidence. He has two victories and a tie for ninth in his last four starts. He also extended his streak of seasons with at least one tour title to 12, an emphatic argument for his inclusion among the finest players in the men’s game (Jack Nicklaus and Arnold Palmer share the record at 17, one better than Billy Casper and three more than Woods).

McIlroy, 29, also extended a streak, this one more enigmatic. Since January of last year, he has played his way into the last group for the final round eight times — without emerging triumphant. McIlroy’s lone title run in that stretch came at Bay Hill last March when he started the final round in the next-to-last group.

To mount a charge, McIlroy needed to get off to the kind of hot start engineered by Casey, who teed off four groups ahead and birdied the first three holes. Johnson started shakily, playing the first five holes in one over, but McIlroy, despite making a birdie at the second, could not swing the momentum his way. He did not find a fairway off the tee until the eighth hole and he missed a birdie putt of 11 feet on the first hole and a 6-footer for par on the fourth.

After playing the first nine in one over, McIlroy settled for par on No. 10, which Johnson birdied. At that point, McIlroy said, his caddie, Harry Diamond, told him to forget about trying to catch Johnson and concentrate on consolidating second place.

“I knew at that point that I didn’t have a chance; D. J. was playing too well,” McIlroy said.

McIlroy covered the final eight holes in five under and all he could do was equal Johnson’s final-nine 31.

“I felt like I was standing still,” McIlroy said with a laugh. “I was making birdies and going nowhere.”

The other member of the final threesome on Sunday was Patrick Reed, who was grouped with McIlroy on Sunday at last year’s Masters and claimed the green jacket with a 71 to McIlroy’s 74. That was McIlroy’s second cubic zirconia in the lustrous string. The fourth was the World Golf Championships event in Ohio, where he could not overcome Thomas’s three-stroke advantage. The sixth was the Tour Championship, where he started three behind Woods. The seventh was the Tournament of Champions, where Xander Schauffele shot a 62 to leapfrog into first.

“I’ve played well, I’ve done what I’ve wanted to do and needed to do,” McIlroy said, adding: “My game’s right there. I’m really happy with everything. I’ve just got to stay patient, look at the positives and just keep persisting and putting myself in positions, and sooner or later hopefully it will go my way.”

Golf could not be going much better for Johnson, who became the fifth player in the last 50 years to collect 20 wins before his 35th birthday, joining Woods, Phil Mickelson, Tom Watson and Johnny Miller.

“It’s very sweet,” Johnson said. “It’s been a lot of hard to get here, but it feels really good. I’m very proud of myself.”

An earlier version of this article referred incorrectly to a milestone reached by Dustin Johnson. He is the fifth golfer int he 50 years to collect 20 wins before his 35th birthday, not the fifth golfer over all to do so.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

NAUCALPAN DE JUÁREZ, Mexico — From where he stood on the fairway on the par-5 15th hole, all Tiger Woods could see on Saturday were the possibilities. He was eight under par for the tournament and stalking a final-round, final-threesome grouping in his Mexico Championship debut.

Standing several yards from Woods, also in the fairway, John Sutcliffe, who is covering the tournament for ESPN and ESPN Deportes, could see all the way to Sunday night.

Sutcliffe, who grew up in a house along the 10th hole of the course, Club de Golf Chapultepec, said, “I was thinking, when it gets to be the final hole of the tournament, maybe the Tiger roar will be in Spanish.”

But elsewhere on the course, Dustin Johnson was pulling away from the field, and No. 15 was about to undo Woods.

His 54-hole total of six under left him tied for ninth in this World Golf Championships event, well out of the final group and 10 strokes behind Johnson, who carded a 66 for a four-shot lead over his closest competitor, Rory McIlroy.

Still the headliner is indisputably Woods, who took 24 years and 381 starts to make his first appearance as a professional in Mexico.

He has drawn large, ardent crowds here, just outside Mexico City. After waiting so long to see Woods up close, the followers were not about to let a few errant swings or wayward putts ruin the festive mood. On Saturday, they shouted things like, “Tiger, Marry My Sister!” and serenaded him with cries of “Tiger” until he disappeared into the scoring room.

Woods’s caddie, Joe LaCava, described Woods as “like Michael Jordan down here” and said the fans were so excited to see him in person, “they didn’t even care where the shots were going.”

At 15, his second shot found a greenside bunker, and he chunked his next shot out of the sand, leaving him a 25-footer for birdie. Woods’s first putt rolled four feet past the hole, and he three-putted from there for a double-bogey 7. It was the 12th four-putt of his career, and it killed momentum. He made bogey on the next hole — also after his tee shot found the fairway — before salvaging a 1-under 70 with a closing birdie.

One of the fans who followed Woods for each of his first three rounds was Sebastian Mondragon, 13, who said he started playing golf when he was 9. He ran from spot to spot, positioning himself so he could try to draw Woods’s attention to a handmade sign that featured the face of a tiger and the exhortation, “Let’s Go, Tiger.”

As Woods walked from the eighth green to the ninth tee, Mondragon stood at the front of the rope line. He waved the sign and shouted Woods’s name, but the 14-time major champion walked past, staring straight ahead.

Mondragon said he hoped that watching Woods would offer some pointers. “What I’ve learned,” Mondragon said, “is he has a very good focus.”

Woods had a lot to process as he headed to the ninth tee. He bent his 9-iron on the eighth hole when he hit a tree during his swing, so the club was out of commission for the rest of the round. He sorely missed it on the 14th hole, when he had the perfect distance for a 9-iron approach.

Using his pitching wedge instead, Woods came up short but still managed par. On the 16th hole, LaCava said, Woods had to lay back off the tee to set up an 8-iron approach.

After the round, Woods, 43, received therapy on his surgically repaired back, LaCava said that after that, his boss intended to meet with a club repairer in hopes of fixing his 9-iron in time for Sunday’s round.

Whatever happens in the final 18 holes, Woods’s debut here will go down as an unqualified hit. In his gallery Saturday was a couple, originally from Portugal, who are living in Mexico City. This was their first time at a golf tournament, they said, and they stopped along the ninth fairway so the husband, Pedro Caixinha, could take a photograph of his wife, Anabela David, with Woods walking in the background.

Caixinha described the photograph as “a souvenir.”

Before the tournament, Sutcliffe told Woods that his presence would make this the most important week in the golf course’s nearly 100-year history. Then he presented Woods with his own souvenir: a bottle of tequila.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Golf

By Bill Pennington

AUGUSTA, Ga. — If Tiger Woods’s victory at the 2019 Masters is among the greatest comebacks in sports history — and it is at least a leading candidate — its origin will forever be traced to what happened on the 12th hole on Sunday when the old Tiger Woods suddenly reappeared at a major championship for the first time in 11 years.

It was far more than a golf hole. It was psychological drama, the instant a former champion reclaimed his domain, and the kind of seminal moment that helps rewrite a sport’s history.

Among the many things that Woods lost in his public fall from grace a decade ago, one of the most obvious was his steely resolve. Gone was the inimitable fortitude that had allowed him to rise above — and then put away — opponents in the crucible of high-pressure competitions.

It was whittled over time, but it had unquestionably been missing. In the 14 minutes that began at 12:30 p.m. Sunday at Augusta National Golf Club, the famous Woods intimidation factor was rejuvenated. About 90 minutes later, when Woods was trying on a fifth green Masters jacket and celebrating a 15th major golf championship, it had been fully restored.

And everyone in the field knew it.

“Tiger’s back,” said Brooks Koepka, the two-time defending United States Open champion.

The opening episode of the day’s turning-point chapter was when Koepka and Ian Poulter, who were playing in the group ahead of Woods, each fell victim to the mental and physical pressure exacted by the mystifying 12th hole. Each dunked his tee shot in Rae’s Creek, which separates the green from the tee 158 yards away.

Koepka and Poulter, who had been challenging for the lead, each double bogeyed and never recovered completely. Then Francesco Molinari, who had a two-stroke lead over Woods and was playing in his group, misjudged and mis-hit his tee shot at the 12th hole into the water. So did Tony Finau, also playing with Woods, and only one stroke behind him at the time.

Woods, playing the hole for the 86th time at the Masters, knew to aim more to the left and used enough club to fight through the tricky breeze to position his ball safely in the center of the green.

But what happened next is what truly altered the mood and kick-started Woods’s charge to victory.

Woods walked over the Hogan bridge and stood defiantly on the 12th green glaring back at Finau and Molinari as they dejectedly stood on the other side of the water, rummaging through their bags for another ball and club to once again try to traverse the creek.

Woods was in their line of sight, standing with his arms crossed or one hand on his hip. He continued to stare in their direction with an expression that seemed to say: “Can you hurry up? I’ve got a tournament to win.”

Molinari and Finau eventually put their third shots on the green. Woods subsequently putted out for his par. Looking thunderstruck, Molinari and Finau missed bogey putts that led to matching double bogeys.

With the tournament on the line, four players at the top of the leaderboard had each dropped two strokes. It was 12:44 p.m. and Woods was tied for the lead in the Masters.

“It all flipped on 12; the mistake Francesco made there let a lot of guys back into the tournament, myself included,” Woods said later. He added with a devilish smile: “It helps to be experienced. That’s all I was concentrating on. Don’t be fooled. The other guys ended up short.”

And what of the death stare from the 12th green as he waited for his chief rivals to sort out their troubles at the very center of the classically crucial Amen Corner?

Woods let his actions speak for themselves.

“It’s a tough hole,” is all he said.

It is especially tough if Tiger Woods, once again commanding and authoritative, is shooting you daggers.

Woods’s victory rekindles a debate that had been dormant for years: whether Jack Nicklaus’s record of 18 major championships can yet be surpassed.

Woods wouldn’t opine on that topic, either.

“It’s a little soon right now, I’m just enjoying the 15th,” he said. “I’m sure I’ll think about a little down the road.”

Woods was hoarse from the primal-like screams he unleashed after tapping in the final putt on the 18th hole to secure his one-stroke victory. At that moment, he had celebrated uproariously around the green, with an unbridled elation and childlike spontaneity that he rarely displayed when he was 20 years younger.

Afterward, an ever-smiling Woods, 43, was even willing to assess his legacy, something he has always been loath to do.

“I’ve driven a lot more youth to the game,” he said. “You know, a lot of the guys that are on the tour now, they’re training. They are getting bigger, stronger, faster and more athletic.

“They are hitting the ball prodigious distances, and a little bit of that’s probably attributed to what I did.”

But Woods had not bequeathed his dogged determination or his ability to impart his will on the outcome of golf tournaments. It had been missing from the game. At the 12th hole on Sunday, it resurfaced and changed the face of the 2019 Masters.

Now the sports world will wait to see if it eventually rewrites golf history.

An earlier version of this article misstated the time Tiger Woods first led the Masters. He shared the lead at times during the first and third rounds; he was not tied for the lead for the first time in the tournament at 12:44 p.m. Sunday.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Valentino Dixon's introduction to golf came when the warden dropped by his 6-by-10 cell at Attica Correctional Facility in New York with a photo of the iconic 12th hole at Augusta National and a simple request.

Could Dixon draw the hole with his colored pencils?

The warden knew Dixon had the talent. He certainly had the time.

"I hadn't heard of the 12th hole, let alone Augusta National," Dixon said. "Nothing about golf. Never paid a second of time to golf, it was always football or basketball where I come from."

Dixon didn't want to disappoint the warden while serving 39 years-to-life after being convicted of killing a man at a street party in his hometown of Buffalo in 1991. The warden, after all, held great sway over his living conditions in one of the nation's most notorious — and dangerous — prisons.

But the last thing he wanted to do was irritate his fellow inmates.

"They might take my credibility card away, they may say he's drawing golf courses, what's going on here," Dixon said. "You don't want people to think, hey, he's too close with the administration and this prison."

So Dixon set about drawing. Some times that went on for 15 hours, with Dixon finding solace drawing the colors of the grass against the brilliantly white sand and blue sky .

The warden loved the image, though that's hardly where this story ends. Dixon made more golf course drawings, hundreds of them from pictures he saw in Golf Digest and other magazines.

It wasn't long before they found other eyes.

In their reflection, he found support and more believers in his innocence . His conviction was vacated last September, but not before he had spent 27 years in prison.

This week, Dixon found himself in a place far removed from his former home . He was at Augusta National for the Masters; it was both eerily familiar and strikingly foreign to him.

He walked down to Amen Corner and saw the 12th hole he knew only from pictures. He met Tiger Woods and Jack Nicklaus, whom he'd only seen in magazines.

It felt like home. The drawings had taken him here day after endless day, when there seemed no end in sight and no reason for hope.

"I just wanted to cry," Dixon said. "I mean inside I was crying but I held back the tears, you know, because it's just so much more remarkable and awesome in person. And I've drawn that 12th hole about eight or nine times and it's nothing like seeing it in person — nothing. It's just like the most wonderful thing that I can see in the world right now."

After spending more than half his life in prison, Dixon might still be there if not for his art. He might be protesting his innocence, too, if not for a Golf Digest writer who answered his letter in 2011 as a submission to a monthly narrative called "How Golf Saved My Life."

"Golf is saving my life right now because I had almost 20 years then and I was on borrowed time myself," Dixon said. "I didn't know if I was going to live one day to see it to the next."

Some of his friends in Attica didn't. They took their own lives.

"I made sure that I kept my sanity," he said. "You know people lose their way."

Golf Digest's Max Adler set the wheels of justice in motion when he replied to Dixon's letter. Seven more years passed before he was finally free.

"I was actually an art major in college, so it's like this is golf and art and the human condition all coming together," Adler said. "I'm of course skeptical that this guy is wrongfully convicted, but the fact that art was sort of a redemptive force for him. I thought I'd like to know more about that."

Adler visited Dixon inside Attica, and saw his colored pencils ground down to the nub. His daughter Valentina's efforts gathered more momentum as, first, two attorneys got involved and then even more when students from Georgetown University's Prison Reform Project took up the cause. The final piece of the puzzle fell into place when a new prosecutor took over in Erie County and reviewed the case.

Another man already incarcerated pleaded guilty to the murder.

"Twenty-seven years, it's just a miracle," Adler said. "And it's a miracle that we ever even heard from him."

Dixon walked out of prison on a day filled with bright sunshine, eager to rejoin the free world. He had to learn how to use a cellphone and adjust to modern life after a generation behind bars. Now he gives inspirational speeches and shows his work in a gallery, most recently in New York.

Dixon says he's not bitter. His mother, though, still bristles when the subject of his incarceration comes up. He was imprisoned on her birthday, and she refused to celebrate any of them for the next 27 years.

Dixon and Adler came to the Masters to complete their journey in the place it really began. His art brought him here, just as it freed him from prison.

"The artwork, it's like God was speaking to my soul," Dixon said. "He was just saying you know it's gonna be all right, you hang in there."

____

The full AP interview with Valentino Dixon and Max Adler is available at PodcastOne Sports Now

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

WASHINGTON — U.S. President Donald Trump on Monday said he would award Tiger Woods the Presidential Medal of Freedom after the golfer won the Masters for the fifth time on Sunday.

"Spoke to @TigerWoods to congratulate him on the great victory he had in yesterday’s @TheMasters, & to inform him that because of his incredible Success & Comeback in Sports (Golf) and, more importantly, LIFE, I will be presenting him with the PRESIDENTIAL MEDAL OF FREEDOM," Trump tweeted.

The victory on Sunday was one of the greatest comebacks in sports history, as the 43-year-old ended an 11-year major title drought having overcome personal and professional setbacks including a highly-public divorce and multiple surgeries. 

The one-stroke win at Augusta National led to an outpouring of support from sports greats and politicians including Trump.

Trump, an avid golfer, and Woods have played together in the past including in February when the pair joined golf great Jack Nicklaus for a round at Trump National Golf Club in Jupiter, Florida. 

Trump appeared to follow the action at this year's Masters closely, tweeting well-wishes to the field on Saturday and encouraging people to tune in when Woods had the lead with just two holes left to play on Sunday. 

"Congratulations to @TigerWoods, a truly Great Champion!" Trump tweeted shortly after Woods sank a short putt to secure his 15th major title. 

"Love people who are great under pressure. What a fantastic life comeback for a really great guy!" he added later.

The medal is the highest civilian honor in the United States and is given annually to people who have made outstanding contributions to the security or national interests of the country, to world peace, or to cultural or other significant public or private endeavors.

Since taking office Trump has given the award to several athletes including former professional NFL players Roger Staubach and Alan Page and late professional baseball player George Herman "Babe" Ruth, Jr.

 (Reporting by Susan Heavey and Rory Carroll; Editing by Chizu Nomiyama and Toby Davis)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

SANYA, China — Officials at the Sanya Championship said Sunday that 28-year-old Malaysian golfer Arie Irawan died in his hotel room from "apparent natural causes," and the PGA Tour Series-China canceled the final round of the tournament.

The PGA Tour Series-China said in a statement that Irawan missed the 36-hole cut Friday in the tournament at Sanya Yalong Bay Golf Club. It said the official coroner's report had not been completed.

"The PGA Tour and the China Golf Association grieve at this loss of one of our members and share sincere condolences with Arie's wife, Marina, and his parents, Ahmad and Jeny," the tour said. "When something of this magnitude occurs in the golf world, we all grieve at the same time.

"Out of respect for the family, officials canceled the final round of the Sanya Championship, the tournament becoming a 54-hole event."

The PGA Tour China had an "In Memorium" photo of Irawan prominently displayed on its website Sunday. 

American Trevor Sluman led after 54 holes with an 18-under total of 198. Three Americans — Matt Gilchrest, Max McGreevy and Michael Perras — were tied for second, two strokes behind.

Going into the tournament, Sluman, who finished ninth on the China Tour's 2018 Order of Merit, was seeking his first win in a four-day professional event since graduating from the University of Louisville in 2015.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Field Level Media

Dustin Johnson shot his second consecutive bogey-free round to build a two-shot lead at 11-under-par 131 after two rounds of the Mexico Championship in Mexico City.

Trailing Rory McIlroy by one shot entering the second round, Johnson found himself four shots back after McIlroy birdied three of his first four holes. But Johnson, who had a putt for birdie on every hole, continued his steady play at Chapultepec Golf Club while McIlroy ran into midround trouble, finishing Friday in a tie for second at 9 under with Matt Kuchar (67).

Because McIlroy got into the clubhouse first with his 1-under 70 on Friday, he will be paired with Johnson in the final group on Saturday. Kuchar will be paired with Sergio García (66), who is tied for fourth place with Tommy Fleetwood at 7 under. Fleetwood tied for the low round of the day with his 65 despite missing a short putt on No. 17.

Ian Poulter (68) and Cameron Smith (67) are another shot off the pace. Tiger Woods was one shot off the low round of the day with his 66, which vaulted him 17 spots and into a five-tie for eighth place at 5 under.

No one had a bigger bounceback Friday than Phil Mickelson, the defending champion, who is tied for 39th. He moved up 31 spots by matching Fleetwood’s 65, and his 14-stroke improvement from the previous day was the largest single-round bounce-back in his 600 career PGA Tour events.

Johnson has not had any such turbulence through the first two days. While acknowledging Chapultepec had narrow fairways, he said the tree-lined holes kept him focused, and Johnson carded four birdies in posting a 67 on Friday.

He hit only half of the fairways in the second round, but he posted bogey-free rounds during the first two rounds of an event for the first time in his career.

“I think I have a very good game plan,” Johnson told reporters. “I don’t really play too aggressive here, but when you can, I try to be aggressive. And try to get myself some good looks at birdie, but off the tee, I can’t be too aggressive.”

Johnson has now been in the top 10 after nine of his past 10 rounds at the event, which is contested more than 7,000 feet above sea level and features many players hitting their long irons more than 300 yards.

“I just enjoy playing this kind of golf,” Johnson told the Golf Channel. “It makes you focus; you’ve got to think. You’re doing a lot of calculations with the numbers and trying to figure out how far the ball actually is going to go. I enjoy it.”

It looked early on as if McIlroy might run away and hide. He was 11 under when he took a rip at the green on the par-5 sixth hole with his second shot. But McIlroy’s ball found the water, and he wound up with a bogey.

He still held a one-shot lead when he stood over a birdie putt on the ninth hole. Having been perfect on all 24 putts inside 10 feet for the week to that point, McIlroy’s attempt lipped out. He also missed the comeback putt for bogey and suddenly found himself looking up at Johnson on the scoreboard.

McIlroy did birdie the 14th hole to get into that powerhouse final group on Saturday.

“We’ve still got 36 holes to go,” Johnson said. “I feel like I’m in a good position going into the weekend, but a two-shot lead is not very much, especially not around here.”

Woods fared much better in just his second professional round in Mexico, improving by five shots over his first-round score. That included a shot from a fairway bunker that sliced around a tree and came a foot or two from holing out.

“I realized that, ‘Jeez, I really gotta slice this thing,’ ” he told reporters. “So I opened up and gave it as much of a cut motion as I could, and it worked out.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Joe Montana or Tom Brady, Serena Williams or Steffi Graf -- there is no shortage of debate in sport over who is the greatest of all time, but do not even try separating golfing icons Tiger Woods and Jack Nicklaus, according to Gary Player.

Woods (14) and Nicklaus (18) have won 32 majors between them, dominating their respective eras, but that does not mean there is any basis for comparison, Player said on Thursday. 

After kicking off the Masters in a ceremonial first tee shot with fellow golf great Nicklaus, nine-times major winner Player reflected on how the game has changed -- and why that makes it impossible to pitch his old sparring partner against Woods.

"How can you compare Tiger Woods to Jack Nicklaus? It's not fair. Let him (Nicklaus) play today with these greens and raked bunkers or bunkers all the same width, and with a driver and a ball that goes 50 yards further," Player told reporters.

Sam Snead was the most athletic, Ben Hogan the greatest golfer "tee-to-green" and Woods is perhaps the most talented, Player said. 

But Nicklaus? "He had the overall game," the three-times Masters champion added. 

That is not to say the South African was not giving the most recognizable player in modern golf his due.

"If Tiger never had the problems he had, which were numerous, he would have won at least 20, 21 majors," said Player, referring to Woods' physical ailments. "I don't think there is a debate about that."

On Thursday, Woods begins his bid for a 15th major win and fifth Masters title.

"Everybody wants to see Tiger Woods win more majors because he moves the needle like nobody playing golf today," Player said.

"What you saw when he won that (Tour) Championship the other day, I don't think I ever saw excitement like that, even when Arnold (Palmer) was at his best."

 (Reporting By Amy Tennery; Editing by Toby Davis)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

PONTE VEDRA BEACH, Fla. — Rory McIlroy’s Sunday drive at TPC Sawgrass was far from leisurely. He spent most of the final round of the Players Championship stuck in his lane in a logjam, pumping his brakes while players grew larger in his rearview mirror.

Eddie Pepperell, who started Sunday six strokes behind McIlroy, caught him, and so, fleetingly, did Jhonattan Vegas, who also began the round six behind him. Early on, McIlroy, who himself began the day trailing Jon Rahm by one, was passed on the leader board by Abraham Ancer, who came from three off his pace. Down the stretch, Jim Furyk, who came from four back, inched ahead.

In contrast to last year, when Webb Simpson squeezed all the drama from the finish with a four-stroke victory, Sunday was a knock-down-drag-out race to the wire, with eight players holding at least a share of the lead — including Vegas for 16 seconds — before McIlroy took command.

McIlroy did not panic when he carded a double bogey on the fourth hole and made the turn in a one-over-par 37. While everyone around him spun out or ran out of road, McIlroy put together four birdies, against one bogey, on the back nine for a final-round two-under 70, good for a one-stroke victory.

McIlroy, of Northern Ireland, finished at 16-under 272, one ahead of Furyk, who closed with a 67, and two in front of Pepperell (66) and Vegas (66). Rahm struggled to a 76 and ended up in a four-way tie for 12th at 11 under.

The victory was McIlroy’s 15th on the PGA Tour, and his second in two years on St. Patrick’s Day weekend.

“It’s not a bad weekend for me,” said McIlroy, who lifted his long-sleeve blue sweater to reveal, along with an impish grin, a green golf shirt.

McIlroy showed little emotion after he two-putted for par on the last hole to close out the tournament in brisk, overcast and intermittently rainy conditions. His emotions, by design, have run the gamut from happy to content during each top-six finish in his first six starts of 2019.

“Of course I desperately wanted the win today, but it’s just another day,” McIlroy said. “It’s just another step in the journey.”

A decade has passed since McIlroy made his first start at Sawgrass, on the week that he turned 20. As he recalled with a laugh, he missed the cut that year while “getting kicked out of bars in Jax Beach for being underage. So I’ve come a long way.”

But his transformation has been deeper than that. McIlroy said he had learned not to tie his self-identity to his scores.

“One thing I used to do in the past is I’d let what I shot that day influence who I was or my mood,” McIlroy said, adding, “It’s something I’ve worked hard on because who I am as a person isn’t who I am as a golfer.”

That TPC Sawgrass, in its return to March after an 12-year run in May, provided a fair test was made plain in the juxtaposition at the top of the long-hitting 29-year-old, McIlroy, and the length-challenged 48-year-old, Furyk.

Furyk, who lives a short drive from the course, was one of the last players to earn his way into the field, and though he came up short in his bid for his first tour title since 2015, he had few complaints; the runner-up finish was his best showing in 23 starts in the event.

“I haven’t put myself in the heat with a really good opportunity to win a golf tournament in a while and I missed it,” Furyk said. “I missed the nerves, I missed the excitement.”

McIlroy, the world No. 6, played in the next-to-last pairing, which was his first big break. He has fallen short of the winner’s circle the past nine times that he has appeared in the final Sunday grouping.

How tough is it to be the hunted on Sunday? Rahm and Tommy Fleetwood (73), who played directly behind McIlroy and Jason Day (72), were the only players in the top 15 who failed to at least equal par.

McIlroy has one more start — the World Golf Championships match-play event in two weeks — before he tries for the fifth time to complete a career Grand Slam with a victory at the Masters.

If he took anything away from Sunday, besides the gold trophy, McIlroy said it was an affirmation that he was on the right track.

“I feel like I’ve managed the first six weeks or six tournaments of the year very well, even with some noise around me, whether it is he can’t close, he can’t play on Sundays, blah, blah, blah,” McIlroy said. “I’ve just got to do my thing, and if I go and I concentrate on me, control what I can do, good golf and good attitude takes care of the rest.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

(Reuters) - CBS Corp said on Tuesday that the broadcast of the Masters final round live coverage averaged 10.8 million viewers, making it the most-watched golf broadcast since last year's Masters final round. 

The final 18 holes, in which Tiger Woods came from behind to win his first major title in 11 years, was watched by 37.2 million viewers in total, up 41 percent from last year's live coverage. It was the most watched Masters Sunday in six years.

The victory led to an outpouring of praise from world leaders and U.S. President Donald Trump said he would award Tiger Woods the Presidential Medal of Freedom.

Broadcast of the live coverage of the final round was moved to Sunday morning due to weather, which affected its ratings. The match was the most-watched morning golf game in 32 years. 

Sunday's final round was rebroadcast in the afternoon. The live coverage peaked with 18.3 million viewers from 2:15 to 2:30 p.m. ET. 

Woods' win is seen boosting the golf business he helped transform 25 years ago.

 (Reporting by Kenneth Li; Editing by Meredith Mazzilli)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

The not-quite-ready-for-prime-time Thanksgiving exhibition with Tiger Woods and Phil Mickelson produced such bad golf that Mickelson and country singer Jake Owen traded barbs about it a day later at Jordan Spieth's wedding.

Owen said it was so bad he deserved a refund. He told Barstool Sports' "Fore Play" podcast that Mickelson, who won $9 million from the TV spectacle, pulled out a wad of $100 bills, handed one to Owen and told him he had 90,000 more where that came from.

Golf's two biggest attractions are back at the Masters, eager to play the kind of golf this week that they couldn't produce in The Match. The two 40-somethings will be on prominent display, though the trash talk that was promised on the pay-per-view money grab will not be heard on the hallowed grounds of Augusta National.

And, unlike The Match, the Masters will deliver.

It always has, with moments like Woods stunning the field in a runaway victory at the age of 21, or Mickelson leaping for joy on the 18th green after finally winning his first major in 2004.

It always has, even when an unknown like Danny Willett came from nowhere to win, only to quickly disappear from the golf landscape.

And it even did last year when Patrick Reed won a green jacket that few in the Sunday crowd seemed particularly happy about.

The Masters enjoys special status as the enduring annual rite of spring, the place every duffer who has ever picked up a club dreams of hitting shots. Set under magnificently manicured fairways and greens and framed by towering pines, it offers a tantalizing glimpse of summer in a place where nothing seems to change but something is different every year.

Arnold Palmer won there four times and Jack Nicklaus six. Woods has four green jackets, and Mickelson has three.

Still, the defending champion is rarely the focus and for the most part the big names in the game aren't either. The course is the star, even when the real tournament begins — as is Masters lore — on the back nine on Sunday.

That's true more than ever this year, even as spectators and television viewers got a rare sneak preview of Augusta National on Saturday for the first time with the final round of a women's amateur tournament.

Reed comes in mired in a deep slump that had him seeking the aid of swing coach David Leadbetter last month, at the insistence of his wife. Bookies in Las Vegas make him a 40-1 pick, long odds for someone trying to become the fourth player to repeat as Masters champion.

Still, Reed said last month he was looking forward to everything about the Masters, except the fact he will have to turn in his green jacket if he's not successful in repeating.

"You want to keep it around as long as you can," Reed said of the famous jacket. "The only way you're going to do that is continue winning at Augusta and continue winning the event so you can have it year in and year out."

History suggests that won't be happening, since only three players before Reed have returned to successfully defend their title. But there is golf to be played before that's decided, and a champion's dinner to be eaten.

Reed said at The Player's Championship that he figured out the menu for the dinner long before he won.

"Oh, I knew that back when I was 13," he said. "I mean, it was always a bone-in ribeye, mac and cheese, creamed corn, creamed spinach. I'm going to fatten those boys up a little bit."

Reed didn't exactly bask in the love of the galleries last year when he rolled in a 3-footer on the 18th green to beat Rickie Fowler by a shot and Spieth by two. The stories that followed didn't make him any easier to root for, when he declined to discuss why his parents weren't welcomed at the tournament despite living just a few miles away.

Mickelson and Woods, meanwhile, have had their own personal issues, though that hasn't dented their popularity. The two are icons of modern golf, and even in their 40s they are among the group of favorites that include Fowler, Spieth, Rory McIlroy and Dustin Johnson.

Just don't expect Mickelson to do what he did at the U.S. Open last year and run after a putt and hit it while it's still moving. Do that at Augusta National and you'd get a one-way trip back out Magnolia Lane, and no invitation in the mail the next spring.

Don't expect Mickelson or Woods to play as badly as they did in their pay-per-view match, either. Both know every inch of grass on Augusta National, both know how to hit miracle shots when it really matters and both have lots of experience in putting the green jacket on.

Then again, Woods hasn't won a Masters in 14 years, and Mickelson is almost a decade removed from his last green jacket. They're legends on a legendary golf course, but there are probably 20 younger players who can beat them when playing their best.

Mickelson and Woods sold their Thanksgiving match with a promise of riveting golf and even better TV.

No need to sell this. It's the Masters, and it's as real as golf gets.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA Ga. (Reuters) - Tony Finau is no stranger to making a charge at Augusta National, fortunately for him the one he made at the Masters on Saturday left him with a better chance of slipping into a Green Jacket than an ankle brace.

Finau, who dislocated his ankle while celebrating an ace in last year's Par-3 Contest on the eve of his Masters debut, surged into contention with an eight-under 64 that brought him to 11 under, two shots off leader Francesco Molinari.

His also tied the tournament's front-nine record with a six-under 30. 

"I can attack the golf course if I'm hitting my driver well, and I have been thus far. I felt good," said Finau. "Going into today, I felt calm and comfortable, and I think my score showed that."

While Finau courageously finished in a share of 10th place at last year's Masters, he was still largely known as the golfer who blew out his ankle while celebrating a hole-in-one.

Finau even had some fun at his own expense this week, sending the gallery into fits of laughter when he put on a hilariously high-topped shoe featuring added support for his since-healed ankle before teeing off in the Par-3 Contest.

Finau, who started the day four shots back of the co-leaders, got off to a scorching start on Saturday, opening with three consecutive birdies.

From there he was off to the races, adding another birdie at the sixth before making eagle at the par-five eighth after his approach settled eight inches from the cup.

Finau, the first golfer of Tongan and American Samoan descent to play on the PGA Tour, added another two birdies on the back nine.

The 29-year-old American will play in the final threesome on Sunday with Molinari (66) and Tiger Woods (67). 

With heavy rain and thunderstorms forecast for late on Sunday, officials have decided to send golfers off in threesomes from both the first and 10th tees rather than the traditional pairs in an attempt to get the final round completed.

Finau is no stranger to being in contention at one of golf's blue-riband events having been in the mix on the final day of last year's U.S. Open, a learning experience he hopes will pay off of Sunday.

"It's going to help because I've been in that ‑‑ I've been in that situation before," said Finau. "Last year I had the lead going into the final round of the U.S. Open, and I took a run at it toward the end.

"I feel like I've learned some things about that finish that I can apply to tomorrow, and hopefully do better."

 (Editing by Peter Rutherford)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. — Let other players take dead aim at titles and trophies. Jin Young Ko is finding success by directing her focus elsewhere.

“I want to be the happiest player on the golf course,” Ko said.

Ko, the latest star in South Korea’s bright constellation, burst into tears Sunday after closing with a two-under-par 70 to win the ANA Inspiration. It was her second L.P.G.A. title in less than a month and her first major championship.

Ko, who posted a 72-hole total of 10-under 278, finished three strokes ahead of her compatriot Mi Hyang Lee, who carded a final-round 70. Lexi Thompson, a former champion, shot a 67 for third, four strokes back.

For Ko, 23, happiness was a 15-foot birdie putt on the 72nd hole, after which she collapsed into the embrace of her caddie, David Brooker, who has guided three players to this championship.

“We are a really good team,” Ko said.

Ko capped her win by leaping into Poppie’s Pond with Brooker by her side.

Brooker said he was approached last year by an intermediary sent to gauge his interest in caddying for Ko. Brooker had worked with golfers who had played competitive rounds with her, so he had seen Ko’s game up close and was impressed with her driving accuracy and self-possession.

But he had an agreement to work for Paula Creamer, a 12-time winner worldwide, through the end of last season, her 14th as a professional. At the end of 2018, after Ko was named the L.P.G.A.’s top rookie, Brooker made the switch.

In her first six starts with Brooker on her bag, Ko has five top-3 finishes, including two victories. Her final-round scoring average is 66.83 strokes. It is a tossup as to who is the hottest player on the planet: Ko or the men’s world No. 3, Rory McIlroy, who has seven top-9 finishes, including one victory, in seven starts in 2019.

The 23-year-old Ko could not have asked for a more capable Sherpa than Brooker to help her plant her name at the top of the ANA Inspiration leader board. He entered the week having made 16 caddie appearances since 1997 at Mission Hills Country Club and two celebratory leaps into Poppie’s Pond, with Grace Park in 2004 and Lorena Ochoa in 2008.

Brooker knows the greens like his backyard, which is why Ko trusted him to read many of her putts.

“He helps me all the time on the green or the fairways,” she said.

Brooker’s guidance can be more subtle. After Ko played in the afternoon Friday and signed for a 71, she said she wanted to spend what little daylight remained working on her swing. Brooker talked her out of it, explaining that the gusting wind would make any range work counterproductive.

He suggested that she spend the time instead on her main area of emphasis during the off-season: chipping and putting.

“We are really good team,” Ko said.

Ko has four L.P.G.A. titles — and 14 over all — since she turned pro in 2013. Before earning her L.P.G.A. membership, Ko starred on the Korean L.P.G.A. tour. She was playing on her homeland circuit in 2015 when she took a three-stroke lead into the final round of her first major start, the Women’s British Open.

Ko, then 19, finished second to her compatriot Inbee Park.

And though that runner-up finish offered validation that her game stacked up well against the best, she said last year that she was hesitant to jump headlong to the L.P.G.A.

Before a tournament in Seoul last October, Ko said she engaged in considerable “soul searching” before she decided to leave home to compete on the American-based tour. Unlike many of her countrywomen, Ko does not maintain a residence in the United States.

“She doesn’t want a base over here,” Brooker said.

Ko’s homing instincts remind him of Ochoa, who was the women’s world No. 1 when she retired at 28 because she could no longer bear to be apart from her family and away from her native Mexico for long stretches.

“I don’t think she’s going to have one of those 20-year careers,” Brooker said. “I could see her playing out here five or six years and then retiring to have a family. She is not motivated by money, she’s not motivated by titles. She just wants to have fun.”

Ko can find the hilarity in courting disaster. On Saturday, she began the day four strokes off the lead, raced to a five-stroke advantage after 10 holes, then gave most of it back with a double bogey at No. 14 and a bogey at No. 15. After she used a pitching wedge to hit her tee shot into the water at the par-3 14th, Ko playfully rested her head on Brooker’s shoulder, sighed and said, “Oh, what have I done?”

Her third-round wobble proved instructive for Ko, who kept calm when she smelled the whiff of disaster on her back nine Sunday. After bogeys on the 13th and 15th holes whittled her lead over Lee to a single stroke, Ko rebounded with a birdie on the par-3 16th to give herself breathing room.

“She is just so smart for her age,” Brooker, said. “She knows what she’s doing out there.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Karen Crouse

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Tiger Woods completed a comeback from personal and professional adversity on Sunday, capturing his fifth Masters title and his 15th major tournament with a victory that snapped a decade-long championship drought and instantly returned him to the top of the sports world.

It was a monumental triumph for Woods, a come-from-behind victory for a player who had had so much go wrong on the course and off after his personal life began to come apart on Thanksgiving night in 2009.

As such, it was only fitting that after he walked off the 18th hole on Sunday, his one-stroke victory secure, his path to the official scoring office was gridlocked with well-wishers, including many of the golfers he vanquished over four grueling days at Augusta National Golf Club.

Woods triumphed in almost stoic fashion, playing with shrewdness and determination over the final stretch of holes while the other players who were grouped with him on the leaderboard took turns succumbing to the pressure of trying to win the Masters.

And although Woods did bogey the final hole, he did so with a two-stroke lead, victory in sight and the knowledge that he could give one of those strokes back and still win the tournament.

Only when he tapped in his final putt did Woods let loose with a joyous shout that revealed how much the victory meant to him.

At 43, Woods became the second-oldest winner of the Masters, behind Jack Nicklaus, who won here in 1986 at age 46 and who holds the record for victories in major tournaments, 18. And Woods’s victory immediately reverberated beyond golf and, for that matter, sports.

The win even led to a rare moment of agreement between President Trump and former President Barack Obama. “What a fantastic life comeback for a really great guy!’’ the President said on Twitter. “To come back and win the Masters after all the highs and lows is a testament to excellence, grit and determination,’’ Obama posted.

Francesco Molinari entered the final round of the Masters alone in the lead by two strokes at 13 under. He stayed atop the leaderboard by himself until the last group — Molinari,  Tiger Woods and Tony Finau — got to the 12th tee.  At which point, Molinari proceeded to double bogey the hole and set up a wild finish in which six golfers at one point or another held at least a share of the lead. (Woods, Molinari, Xander Schauffele, Patrick Cantlay, Brooks Koepka, Dustin Johnson). There was briefly a five-way tie for first until Woods took sole possession of the lead for good at the 15th hole, where he birdied and Molinari made another double bogey.

Eagle

Birdie

Bogey

Double bogey

KEY

Players’ final-round scores in parentheses. 

Scores for each hole are par unless noted. 

Hole

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Par – 72

4

5

4

3

4

3

4

5

4

Yards – 7,475

FINISH

445

575

350

240

495

180

450

570

460

– 13

Woods (70)

– 12

– 11

– 10

– 11

– 12

– 12

Johnson, D. (68)

– 7

– 8

– 12

Schauffele (68)

– 9

– 10

– 9

– 8

– 7

– 8

– 9

– 12

Koepka (70)

– 11

– 10

– 11

 

– 11

Day (67)

– 7

– 6

– 7

– 8

– 11

Simpson (70)

– 8

– 11

Molinari (74)

– 12

– 13

– 11

Finau (72)

– 10

– 11

Rahm (68)

– 10

– 8

– 7

– 6

– 5

– 6

– 10

Cantlay (68)

– 7

– 8

– 7

– 8

– 9

– 10

Fowler (69)

– 8

– 8

– 7

Hole

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Par – 72

4

4

3

5

4

5

3

4

4

Yards – 7,475

FINISH

495

505

155

510

440

530

170

440

465

– 13

Woods (70)

– 11

– 12

– 13

– 14

– 13

– 12

Johnson, D. (68)

– 12

– 9

– 10

– 11

– 12

Schauffele (68)

– 10

– 11

– 12

– 12

Koepka (70)

– 12

– 9

– 11

– 11

Day (67)

– 9

– 10

– 11

– 11

Simpson (70)

– 9

– 10

– 11

– 11

Molinari (74)

– 12

– 11

– 11

– 10

– 11

Finau (72)

– 10

– 8

– 9

– 10

– 11

Rahm (68)

– 10

– 9

– 10

– 10

Cantlay (68)

– 10

– 11

– 10

– 12

– 10

Fowler (69)

– 8

– 9

– 10

– 11

– 7

– 10

Eagle

Birdie

Bogey

Double bogey

KEY

Players’ final-round scores in parentheses. Scores for each hole are par unless noted. 

Hole

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Par – 72

4

5

4

3

4

3

4

5

4

4

4

3

5

4

5

3

4

4

Yards – 7,475

FINISH

445

575

350

240

495

180

450

570

460

495

505

155

510

440

530

170

440

465

– 13

Woods (70)

– 12

– 11

– 10

– 11

– 12

– 11

– 12

– 13

– 14

– 13

– 12

Johnson, D. (68)

– 12

– 7

– 8

– 9

– 10

– 11

– 12

Schauffele (68)

– 9

– 10

– 9

– 8

– 7

– 8

– 9

– 10

– 11

– 12

– 12

Koepka (70)

– 11

– 10

– 11

– 12

 

– 9

– 11

– 11

Day (67)

– 7

– 6

– 7

– 8

– 9

– 10

– 11

– 11

Simpson (70)

– 8

– 9

– 10

– 11

– 11

Molinari (74)

– 12

– 13

– 12

– 11

– 11

– 10

– 11

Finau (72)

– 10

– 11

– 10

– 8

– 9

– 10

– 11

Rahm (68)

– 10

– 8

– 7

– 6

– 5

– 6

– 9

– 10

– 10

Cantlay (68)

– 7

– 8

– 7

– 8

– 9

– 10

– 11

– 10

– 12

– 10

Fowler (69)

– 8

– 8

– 8

– 9

– 10

– 11

– 7

– 7

– 10

By The New York Times

[Just like the old days, Tiger Woods won the Masters by intimidating his opponents.]

Woods’s victory had an epic feel to it. At Augusta, on perhaps the sport’s biggest stage, was its seminal figure, suddenly back on top, which is where he was a decade ago when everything suddenly went sideways for him.

What followed was a long, painful period of his life, in which his body repeatedly broke down and his marriage collapsed. But after prevailing on Sunday, Woods is back in the pantheon of the sports world’s biggest stars, back on a level with LeBron James, Serena Williams and Lionel Messi, back in a space he entered with his first Masters victory in 1997, when he was a skinny 21-year-old a year removed from Stanford who declared “Hello World” in a classic Nike commercial.

“It’s unreal for me to experience this,’’ Woods said in a television interview after his victory on Sunday. “It was one of the hardest I’ve ever had to win just because of what’s transpired the last couple of years.”

The long drought Woods endured between major championships — his previous one came at the 2008 United States Open — would have once seemed inconceivable. The same could be said for the 14 years it took for Woods to finally win his fifth title at Augusta National, a course so suited for his game that Nicklaus once predicted that Woods would collect more than the combined 10 Masters titles that he and Arnold Palmer won there.

And yet there was an eerie familiarity to what took place on Sunday. Woods played his final round before crowds that were 10 to 12 deep for hundreds of yards at every hole — from tee box to green.

In a sense, though, the gallery that really mattered to Woods was much smaller and consisted of his mother, Kultida, and his two children — his 10-year-old son, Charlie Axel, and his 11-year-old daughter, Sam Alexis. His children were among the first to greet him once his triumph was complete. Neither had been born when Woods basically ruled the sport.

They essentially knew of their father’s exploits from photographs and other people’s memories — and they knew golf mostly as a game that had caused their father terrible distress. But not anymore.

The years between Woods’s 14th and 15th victories in major tournaments included an immense number of setbacks, although his struggles actually date to the 2006 death of his father, Earl, who was his soulmate and putting guru. Two years later, Woods won the United States Open victory on a left leg in need of surgery, but a year after that, a marital dispute about his philandering led to a car accident and a succession of lurid headlines. A divorce followed in 2010.

Tiger Woods’s record in the 11 years since his last victory in a major tournament.

MAJORS

M: THE MASTERS

U: U.S. OPEN

B: BRITISH OPEN

PGA TOURNAMENTS ENTERED

TOP 10

WON

P: P.G.A. CHAMPIONSHIP

YEAR

5

10

15

20

M

U

B

P

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

MAJORS

M: THE MASTERS

U: U.S. OPEN

B: BRITISH OPEN

PGA TOURNAMENTS ENTERED

TOP 10

WON

P: P.G.A. CHAMPIONSHIP

YEAR

5

10

15

20

M

U

B

P

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

By The New York Times

The ensuing years brought repeated back operations, which led to an addiction to painkillers and culminated in pain so searing that, before an operation in 2017, he questioned whether he could play professionally again. That year, he hit rock bottom when he was charged with driving under the influence after he was found in a painkiller haze at the wheel of his car with the motor running.

Woods said that when he was down, he gained strength from what he described as his children’s “infectious happiness.”

“To have my kids here, it’s come full circle,” he said after Sunday’s final round. “My dad was here in ’97, and now I’m the dad with two kids there.”

With a closing round of two-under-par 70, Woods edged two other major champions — Dustin Johnson and Brooks Koepka — as well as Xander Schauffele, a 25-year-old from San Diego. Woods’s 72-hole score of 13-under 275 was one shot better than his total in his 2005 victory at Augusta. And it was the first time that Woods, who started the day two strokes off the lead, had come from behind in the final round to win a major tournament.

Woods’s children were also with him last summer when he saw the first real glimmers of hope in his comeback — at the British Open. They saw him play his way into contention over the first three days of that tournament and then briefly take the lead in the final round on his way to a tie for sixth. Afterward, he told his children that he hoped that they were proud of how he fought and refused to give up.

At Augusta, his children arrived on Saturday night, providing extra motivation for Woods to prevail. Parenthood has imbued Woods with extra patience, which came in handy on the front nine on Sunday, when he made back-to-back bogeys while elsewhere on the course players were leapfrogging over one another and into contention with birdies and eagles. Indeed, late in Sunday’s round, 10 players, including Woods, were within two strokes of the lead.

But amid that intense grouping, it was Woods who found a way to finish first.

Woods’s first Masters title, in 1997, by an astounding 12 strokes, left an indelible mark on the sport. He became the first African-American — Woods is also half Thai — to win golf’s most exalted championship. He reshaped the game, making it more athletic and more popular — especially outside the United States.

In 1997, the first person at Augusta to greet Woods as he came off the final hole in triumph was his father, whose grand plan Woods had realized with his victory. His mother was there, too. She was also on hand Sunday, but after her embrace, Woods took a few steps forward and was smothered by his second family — the other players, some of whom were almost young enough to be his children.

Sunday’s final round was moved up five hours to avoid an ominous forecast for later in the day. Players were grouped in threesomes to speed play. Woods took the lead for good on the par 5 15th hole with a birdie putt. And when he then arrived at the 16th tee, a familiar face and friend — the record-setting swimmer Michael Phelps — was standing close enough to touch him.

It was Phelps who had spent two months in a treatment center in 2014 after trying to self-medicate with alcohol. It was Phelps who became an informal counselor to Woods after the 2017 painkiller episode. And it was Phelps who was on hand as Woods closed out his comeback with his final putt.

“When I tapped the putt in — I don’t know what I did,’’ Woods said. “I know I screamed.”

And as he then put on the winner’s green jacket for a fifth time, he said something everyone knew but might have forgotten: “It fits.”









Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

(Reuters) - A Wisconsin man who bet $85,000 on Tiger Woods to win the Masters was handed a check for $1.275 million by bookmaker William Hill on Monday.

A day after Woods came from behind to win his first major title in 11 years, a video circulating online showed James Adducci picking up his check at SLS Las Vegas Hotel & Casino.

The 39-year-old told Golf Digest that the 14-1 bet was his first sports wager. The stockbroker, who works from home, said he planned to spend the winnings on home improvements and paying off debts while investing the rest. 

Reports said the net $1.19 million payout was the largest for a single ticket golf bet in the company's history in the United States. 

"Pretty good first bet," Nick Bogdanovich, William Hill's U.S. director of trading, told ESPN. 

"It's great to see Tiger back. It's a painful day for William Hill -- our biggest loss ever -- but a great day for golf." 

William Hill was not the only bookmaker to feel the pain after the 43-year-old Woods secured his fifth green jacket at Augusta National. 

SuperBook at Westgate Las Vegas had a "high five-figure" net loss on its Masters futures, and offshore sportsbook BetOnline.ag said the surprise win produced the company's biggest loss on a futures market, ESPN said. 

 (Reporting by Rory Carroll; Editing by Peter Rutherford)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — Golf's not-so-mad scientist Bryson DeChambeau has been putting with the flagstick in the hole for much of this year after a rule change that allowed it.

Perhaps it is too bad he did not remove the stick for his 195-yard approach shot to the final hole at Augusta National on Thursday.

Had he so, the ball might have gone in, but instead it clattered against the stick and stopped a couple of inches away for a tap-in birdie.

"Should have pulled the flagstick out," the American joked after a six-under-par 66 that tied for the first-round lead with Ryder Cup team mate Brooks Koepka.

"But no, it was a great shot, and I was excited just to tap-in to finish off a great round."

It was his first sub-70 score in nine rounds at Augusta, where he tied for 21st and 38th in his previous appearances.

Physics major DeChambeau has brought a level of scientific analysis to golf perhaps unmatched by a professional.

The 25-year-old former U.S. Amateur champion plays with shafts of all his irons the same length, all but unheard of until he burst onto the scene. He claims it allows for a more repeatable swing plane.

He knows that it will take a few more rides at the rodeo to learn every nuance of Augusta, where experience does not go astray.

"I don't know if I'm going to be able to figure out every little nuance of this golf course in my third year playing, but what I can do is prepare as good as I can and be comfortable with my own game in any situation," he said.

"So that when I get out here, any situation that arises, I feel I can execute and play the game that's necessary."

Only one under after 11 holes, there was little to suggest the fireworks to come.

"Executed a beautiful nine-iron on 12 that got me rolling," said DeChambeau, who also birdied the final four holes.

"What a magical back nine.

"I was hitting it great all day, driving it well, just an accumulation of great golf that finally showed in the score."

 (Reporting by Andrew Both)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

AUGUSTA, Ga. — The first green jacket was all about the future.

The fifth green jacket Tiger Woods won Sunday at the Masters was more about the past, best measured by a powerful celebration and enormous popularity than by any ripple effect it might have in golf.

Tim Finchem was in this third year as PGA Tour commissioner in 1997 when a 21-year-old Woods — in his 15th start on tour, already with three victories — set 20 records at Augusta National with a 12-shot victory that made him the youngest Masters champion.

Finchem now is in his third year of retirement from the PGA Tour with his own green jacket as an Augusta National member. He was at the Masters most of the week until watching with millions of others on Sunday, with a different perspective from most.

"It was eerie to me on Sunday because in my mind, this was just a '97 repeat. It was incredible," Finchem said Tuesday. "But then I started thinking about it, and it's not that at all. It was very different."

Woods was the freight train everyone heard coming in 1997.

The most dominant junior ever, he won three straight U.S. Junior Amateurs and three straight U.S. Amateurs. The last one was held the same week as the World Series of Golf at Firestone, and Finchem once recalled how players would watch the U.S. Amateur in the locker room and wonder what they were in for when Woods turned pro.

Within two months, Woods qualified for the Tour Championship by winning twice in seven starts. He won the Tournament of Champions to start the next year. And then he demolished the field and Augusta National like no one had ever seen, making him the first man of color in a green jacket.

It remains his most significant victory because it changed the entire golf landscape.

"Golf fans were all into him," Finchem said. "But they hadn't seen that much of him except for winning tournaments."

Now they know a lot more — too much, at times.

It's those 22 years between his first and latest major that make No. 15 the most popular of all.

"Between then and now, these people have watched his every move — every difficult challenge, losing his game, coming back, private issues — and so they know a lot more about him as a person," Finchem said. "People are just over the moon about this. Part of this has to do with how he's handled himself the last two, three, four years. He's been a very positive force, a leader among the players, and he's at another level of interface with millions and millions of fans.

"They love to watch him play golf."

That much hasn't changed.

Television ratings spiked following that 1997 victory, right when the PGA Tour was negotiating a new television contract. The total prize money on the PGA Tour in 1997 was $70.7 million, and it jumped to $135.8 million under the new TV deal in 1999. This year it's at $340 million, not including FedEx Cup bonus money.

Woods made everyone rich.

Ratings still spike whenever he plays. Galleries are larger and louder.

It's been that way since 1997, even during the lean years for Woods when his image was tarnished through tabloid stories of extramarital affairs, when his body began to break down and his glutes didn't activate, when he returned too soon from his first back surgery and went five years without winning.

The appeal never left. When he plays, people want to watch.

When he wasn't playing — Woods went two straight years without a tee time in the majors — the legend grew because all anyone had were memories, and those were far more powerful than anything he showed on the golf course.

That's why his latest Masters victory was so amazing to so many.

Memories became real. The Sunday red shirt was brighter than ever. There was audible excitement in the press building, from a younger generation that had never seen him win a major, from an older generation that thought it might never happen again.

It felt for a moment that nothing had changed, when so much has.

And in some respects, that makes it even bigger.

Woods no longer is invincible. This was his hardest major to win, and not just because he had overcome so much in his life and with his health. Woods had never won a major when so many others had a chance on the back nine.

He won because he hit better shots, smarter shots. This was more about execution than mystique.

And it was about redemption.

Finchem recalled one other moment, at Torrey Pines in 2015 a week after Woods shot 82 in the Phoenix Open, when he was asked if he was worried about Woods.

There was concern as a fan because Finchem wanted to see him at his best as he challenged the records for majors (Jack Nicklaus) and career PGA Tour wins (Sam Snead). As a commissioner? Not so much, because everyone was watching.

"But now, it occurred to me looking back on it that in many ways, people love to watch him play golf, but they wanted to love him," Finchem said.

They missed him. Now they have him back, and for how much longer doesn't matter as much as it once did.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Lisa D. Mickey

Minimizing manicured grass isn’t the first thing that comes to mind when you think of improvements to a high-end golf course.

But Sailfish Point Golf Club on Hutchinson Island on Florida’s east coast, did just that. Now, butterflies have moved in where native grasses and flowers have been allowed to grow tall.

Across the state, on Sanibel Island, the Sanctuary Golf Club ripped out concrete cart paths and brought in beehives to help pollinate the local wildflowers.

In Skidaway, Ga., near Savannah, the Landings Club dug a new irrigation system to lower water consumption, and it built nesting areas for a native terrapin rescue program.

Golf courses and environmental initiatives haven’t always coexisted. But today, many course superintendents — the men and women who plan and maintain courses — hope to reshape that thinking.

Sustainability efforts are often “motivated by economics,” said Max Adler, the editorial director of Golf Digest. “The whole industry is seeing a correction away from the very manicured, overmanufactured look of golf—and at the same time what really motivates golf courses to pursue that look is the bottom line. The less water you use, the less grass grows, the less maintenance you have to cover.”

In the last 10 years, he said, many clubs have replaced manicured areas of their courses “with sand, with native floras and shrubs that exist naturally on the topography and just leave it. And it looks beautiful.”

“If you’re doing things that are economically sound, it’s often in line with what you are doing environmentally,” said James Murphy, an extension specialist in turf management at Rutgers University in New Jersey.

Players and residents also are demanding more eco-friendly practices.

“It’s very important to people now that the community they live in respects the environment and takes care of it,” said Kristen Cheskaty, a broker and a managing partner at Sailfish Point Realty in Stuart, Fla.

Because of that, golf communities in the United States and elsewhere in the world are focusing on things as varied as eliminating plastic and foam cups in their snack shops and reducing fertilizers and chemicals in the upkeep of the fairways.

“All the little things add up,” Mr. Adler said. “Even though it’s a small footprint for the day, over the course of the season it’s real. More importantly it sends a message to people’s minds that we want to be thoughtful and sensitive to the environment.”

Florida’s Sailfish Point has followed guidelines created by a not-for-profit environmental education organization called Audubon International, which offers a certification program for good golf-course management practices.

Sailfish Point — a private 532-acre waterfront development with 520 low-rise homes, condominiums and townhouses — is bordered on the east by the Atlantic Ocean, the Fort Pierce Inlet to the north, and the Indian River Lagoon to the west.

But in recent years, the lagoon has suffered from extensive algae blooms that most experts believe are related to discharge from Lake Okeechobeee, which is surrounded by farmland and polluted by fertilizer runoff.

Scott MacPhee, the director of golf course operations at Sailfish Point, said many residents were concerned about any role the golf course could play in contributing to such pollution.

“A lot of fingers could easily be pointed at our community and our operation, and I didn’t want that for our members,” Mr. MacPhee said. “Whether the blame is on golf courses, farms or septic tanks, ultimately, we all want to do the right thing and we all want clean water.”

More than 800 golf courses in the United States and 2,100 courses in 34 countries have been certified by Audubon International.

At Sailfish Point, earning the certificate took about two years. The work began in 2016 and included an environmental assessment and developing a wildlife and habitat management plan; reducing chemical use; and stepping up water conservation. In some areas, the golf course staff planted vegetation buffer zones, allowing growth of mangrove trees and aquatic plants to form a barrier between the golf course and waterways.

Mark Perry, the executive director at the Florida Oceanographic Society in Stuart, who has consulted with the staff at Sailfish Point, said that the development’s buffer zones are “good common practice to let the shoreline vegetation help absorb nutrients” that can be damaging to the environment.

Although Audubon International began the certification program around 30 years ago, a degree of confusion still exists about its relationship with the 114-year-old National Audubon Society, a nonprofit conservation group with the mission “to protect birds and the places they need, today and tomorrow.” The two are separate, unrelated entities.

In Georgia, Chris Steigelman, who oversees three of the six Audubon International-certified golf courses at the Landings, said the certification process included installing a more drought-tolerant turf grass with a deeper root zone and a more effective irrigation system, which cost more than $10 million. Those steps have enabled the Landings to reduce water use by nearly 40 percent on its courses, he said.

The Landings, situated within tidal salt marshes and the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway, is also popular with native Diamondback Terrapins, which had a risky habit of depositing their eggs in golf course bunkers.

Carolyn McInerney, a local real estate agent who lives at the Landings, began the Diamondback Terrapin Rescue Project by placing the eggs in little flower pots on her back porch.

“Now, we have five different nest boxes built around the golf course with community signs telling people about the program, as well as terrapin hatchling release parties,” Mr. Steigelman said. “It’s become a big community project.”

In addition to the terrapin nests, the Landings has a system of bluebird boxes installed throughout its courses, monitored by community volunteers; pollinator gardens with native plantings for bees and butterflies; and a bird-cam to monitor owl, eagle and osprey nesting.

“People are looking for quality of life and that truly sells the island,” Ms. McInerney said. “More and more people are interested in nature.”

Meredith Welch moved to Skidaway Island in 2008 after working for 20 years in New York City. She said she had been attracted to a place where she could be outdoors all year

“When I became a resident here, I couldn’t believe I could sit in my backyard and watch hawks, fox, deer and an amazing parade of animals walk through because there are no fences between neighbors,” she said.

After seeing the benefits of certification for the golf courses at the Landing, Ms. Welch helped start an effort to get Audubon certification for the city’s residential section, a process that took five years.

“We have a right to clean water and clean air,” Ms. Welch said. “And we can learn that we should protect things that are fragile and precious.”

In southwest Florida, the Sanctuary stands out for its location.

The community and its course, which has been certified by Audubon International, are surrounded by the 6,300-acre J.N. Ding Darling National Wildlife Refuge — home to more than 300 species of birds, 50 species of reptiles and more than 30 mammal species. Two-thirds of the island is protected land.

“If you’re going to be buying real estate on Sanibel Island, you’ve already bought into the environmental side of things and you probably already get it,” said Kyle Sweet, the superintendent at the Sanctuary Golf Club, the island’s only private course.

Mr. Sweet not only maintains his course to Audubon International standards, but he also is guided by the wildlife refuge, as well as by rigid city requirements. Water quality and chemical nutrient loads are regularly monitored and the city issues an annual grade.

Even residences are regulated in regard to impermeable surfaces, such as driveways. The Sanctuary has removed more than a mile and a half of concrete cart paths from the course.

The course has also converted to hardier, salt-tolerant turf grass and upgraded its irrigation system for a 30 percent savings in water use.

“We have a lot of members who are on the board at the Sanibel-Captiva Conservation Foundation and Ding Darling National Wildlife Refuge,” said Kathryn Riggio, the membership coordinator at the Sanctuary. “They are very invested in our environmental responsibility.”

After Dr. Wendy Kindig, a Sanctuary resident and golf club member, retired from her clinical nephrology practice, she got involved in enviromental efforts at the Sanctuary, as well as on the board of the “Ding” Darling Wildlife Society.

“Conservation is pretty ingrained in this community,” she said.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA Ga. (Reuters) - With the cool stroke of a putter under ominous clouds hovering over the 18th green at Augusta National, Tiger Woods put an emphatic finishing touch on the most redemptive victory in sport history on Sunday.

While the scene was a familiar one since Woods came into the week with four Green Jackets, this one was the most improbable given it followed years of surgeries and personal problems that convinced many the best golfer of his generation was done.

But the 43-year-old Woods, who two years ago was barely hitting 60-yard shots as he worked his way back from spinal fusion surgery in April 2017, turned back the clock to deliver the sporting world a tale of redemption unlike any other.

"I had serious doubts after what transpired a couple years ago. I could barely walk. I couldn't sit. Couldn't lay down. I really couldn't do much of anything," said Woods.

"Luckily I had the procedure on my back, which gave me a chance at having a normal life. But then all of a sudden, I realized I could actually swing a golf club again.

"I felt if I could somehow piece this together that I still had the hands to do it. The body's not the same as it was a long time ago, but I still have good hands."

When his tap-in bogey settled in the cup for a one-shot win, Woods threw up his arms in triumph, igniting chants of "Tiger Tiger" that bounced through the pines as he went on to share celebratory hugs with his mother, two children and girlfriend.

The moment was a long time coming for the former world number one, who last tasted major success at the 2008 U.S. Open when his oldest child, daughter Sam, was still an infant.

Since that day, Woods went through a highly-public divorce in 2010 after revelations of his marital infidelities convinced him to take a self-imposed hiatus from professional golf, a DUI arrest in 2017 as well as multiple knee and back surgeries.

'STRUGGLED FOR YEARS'

Ever since Woods appeared on television's Mike Douglas Show at the age of two displaying his raw putting skills alongside Bob Hope, he has been expected to produce the remarkable.

And while the list of remarkable feats that Woods went on to achieve on the golf course is seemingly never ending, even he admitted this triumph, which drew congratulatory messages from U.S. President Donald Trump and former President Barack Obama, is among the most special.

"It would be up there," Woods said when asked where his latest major ranks. "One of the hardest I have ever had to win just because what has transpired the last couple years with trying to come back to playing."

Woods was two back of overnight leader Francesco Molinari when he stepped up to the par-four 11th, which marks the start of a five-hole stretch at Augusta National where the year's first major often hangs in the balance.

After yet another errant tee shot, Woods recovered with a skillful approach at 11 for par then moved into a share of the lead at the par-three 12th where Molinari made double-bogey after his tee shot went into Rae's Creek.

From there Woods, clad in his familiar final-round red shirt and black pants and the galleries hanging on his every swing, was off to the races as he showcased his competitive nerve to win a major for the first time while trailing after 54 holes. 

To do so, Woods had to fend off a slew of big-name players who at some point over the back nine either held a share of the lead or were just a shot back.

Woods said one of the things he was most happy about was that his children, who were at last year's British Open when he could not hang onto a back-nine lead, were able to witness it in person after watching him fight pain for so long.

"The kids are starting to understand how much this game means to me, and some of the things I've done in the game; prior to comeback, they only knew that golf caused me a lot of pain," said Woods.

"If I tried to swing a club I would be on the ground and I struggled for years, and that's basically all they remember.

With the win Woods broke Gary Player's record (13 years) for the longest gap between Masters wins. It also breathed new life into a decades-long debate about whether the 15-times major winner can catch Jack Nicklaus (18) on the all-time list.

When he finally slipped back into the winner's Green Jacket, a scene many golf fans had longed for but never thought they would see again, Woods had just two words to say:

"It fits."

 (Reporting by Frank Pingue, editing by Pritha Sarkar)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA Ga. (Reuters) - With the cool stroke of a putter under ominous clouds hovering over the 18th green at Augusta National, Tiger Woods put an emphatic finishing touch on the most redemptive victory in sport history on Sunday.

While the scene was a familiar one since Woods came into the week with four Green Jackets, this one was the most improbable given it followed years of surgeries and personal problems that convinced many the best golfer of his generation was done.

But the 43-year-old Woods, who two years ago was barely hitting 60-yard shots as he worked his way back from spinal fusion surgery in April 2017, turned back the clock to deliver the sporting world a tale of redemption unlike any other.

"I had serious doubts after what transpired a couple years ago. I could barely walk. I couldn't sit. Couldn't lay down. I really couldn't do much of anything," said Woods.

"Luckily I had the procedure on my back, which gave me a chance at having a normal life. But then all of a sudden, I realized I could actually swing a golf club again.

"I felt if I could somehow piece this together that I still had the hands to do it. The body's not the same as it was a long time ago, but I still have good hands."

When his tap-in bogey settled in the cup for a one-shot win, Woods threw up his arms in triumph, igniting chants of "Tiger Tiger" that bounced through the pines as he went on to share celebratory hugs with his mother, two children and girlfriend.

The moment was a long time coming for the former world number one, who last tasted major success at the 2008 U.S. Open when his oldest child, daughter Sam, was still an infant.

Since that day, Woods went through a highly-public divorce in 2010 after revelations of his marital infidelities convinced him to take a self-imposed hiatus from professional golf, a DUI arrest in 2017 as well as multiple knee and back surgeries.

'STRUGGLED FOR YEARS'

Ever since Woods appeared on television's Mike Douglas Show at the age of two displaying his raw putting skills alongside Bob Hope, he has been expected to produce the remarkable.

And while the list of remarkable feats that Woods went on to achieve on the golf course is seemingly never ending, even he admitted this triumph, which drew congratulatory messages from U.S. President Donald Trump and former President Barack Obama, is among the most special.

"It would be up there," Woods said when asked where his latest major ranks. "One of the hardest I have ever had to win just because what has transpired the last couple years with trying to come back to playing."

Woods was two back of overnight leader Francesco Molinari when he stepped up to the par-four 11th, which marks the start of a five-hole stretch at Augusta National where the year's first major often hangs in the balance.

After yet another errant tee shot, Woods recovered with a skillful approach at 11 for par then moved into a share of the lead at the par-three 12th where Molinari made double-bogey after his tee shot went into Rae's Creek.

From there Woods, clad in his familiar final-round red shirt and black pants and the galleries hanging on his every swing, was off to the races as he showcased his competitive nerve to win a major for the first time while trailing after 54 holes. 

To do so, Woods had to fend off a slew of big-name players who at some point over the back nine either held a share of the lead or were just a shot back.

Woods said one of the things he was most happy about was that his children, who were at last year's British Open when he could not hang onto a back-nine lead, were able to witness it in person after watching him fight pain for so long.

"The kids are starting to understand how much this game means to me, and some of the things I've done in the game; prior to comeback, they only knew that golf caused me a lot of pain," said Woods.

"If I tried to swing a club I would be on the ground and I struggled for years, and that's basically all they remember.

With the win Woods broke Gary Player's record (13 years) for the longest gap between Masters wins. It also breathed new life into a decades-long debate about whether the 15-times major winner can catch Jack Nicklaus (18) on the all-time list.

When he finally slipped back into the winner's Green Jacket, a scene many golf fans had longed for but never thought they would see again, Woods had just two words to say:

"It fits."

 (Reporting by Frank Pingue, editing by Pritha Sarkar)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

On Golf

By Bill Pennington

The cheering was already raucous as Tiger Woods walked up the 18th fairway on Saturday, but when he smiled and tipped his cap, the volume doubled. The clamor diminished ever so slightly, and then Woods raised his putter in salute, and the roar reached new heights. A few strides later, Woods was on the green, and he offered a wave of his right hand and another grin. This time, the crowd erupted with its most thunderous ovation.

It was hard to tell who was having more fun: the crowd as it shouted its welcome back or a playful Woods as he relished the sounds.

One thing was certain: The reality of a breathtaking Tiger Woods Sunday at the Masters — the meaningful kind few expected to ever see again — was setting in for the fans at Augusta National Golf Club, and for sports fans everywhere. Woods ended his third round by tapping in for par and a five-under-par 67, good enough to get into Sunday’s final threesome (a change from the usual pairs to speed things up ahead of expected bad weather). Woods will head into Augusta’s typically dramatic fourth round just two strokes behind the leader, Francesco Molinari.

[The drought is over. With a strong final round, Tiger Woods won The Masters.]

But in the warmth of a spring Saturday evening, the throng around the 18th green did not want to let Woods go. He began to exit, but a last full-throated hurrah from the crowd caused Woods to turn back briefly — as if he wanted to save a mental image of the scene.

Then, finally, he began the walk up the hill toward the clubhouse locker room.

Still, fans surged anew to be near him, lining up 10 deep along the narrow path protected by ropes and security officials. Their voices followed and enveloped Woods like a cascading wave, cresting the rise as he did, and then flowing back down the other side of the knoll until Woods ducked his head inside a small white door and disappeared.

Even without Woods to fete in person, the fans, some of them gleefully facing one another, continued to shout and cheer. It was as if they were celebrating their own good fortune.

Tiger Woods, at 11 under for the tournament, was two strokes off the lead at the Masters with 18 holes to go. It was no time for quiet.

[Read how Tiger Woods pushed his body to the point of breakdown and then came back.]

Afterward, Woods conceded that he felt the ground-shaking decibel level mount.

“It was a good day for everybody,” he said with a laugh. “It’s been a while since I’ve been in contention here. Tomorrow will be interesting.”

Compared to most of the field, who generally attacked a rain-softened golf course and surged up the leaderboard in the early going on Saturday, Woods was the slow starter in the third round. His fans shadowed him from shot to shot, but they were subdued, especially after Woods bogeyed the fifth hole and dropped several strokes behind Tony Finau, who also finished Saturday at 11 under.

On the walk from the fifth green to the sixth tee, Woods talked to himself. He saw the low scores on the leaderboard. After his round, he noted that even some of the amateurs in the field were four or five under for the day.

That got his attention.

“The golf course is certainly gettable,” Woods said.

But instead of becoming overly aggressive, he remembered where he was. This was Augusta National, which rarely rewards the brash.

He said to himself, “Just be patient; let the round build.”

His tee shot to the par-3 sixth green stopped 12 feet from the hole, and Woods curled in the tricky downhill birdie putt with a deft left-to-right break. Another birdie followed on the seventh hole, and at the par-5 eighth, his second shot stopped 11 feet from the hole. His eagle attempt skidded just past it.

“It was the only putt I missed all day,” he said. “But it was a good putt.”

Woods was now eight under par for the tournament and a stroke off the lead. The galleries stalked him into Amen Corner, where he laid up before Rae’s Creek but pitched to 6 feet and made that birdie putt, too.

The par 5s have always been where Woods has won and lost Masters championships. The 13th hole is his favorite, and in 22 Masters appearances, he is 52 under par there. The next most generous hole for Woods has been the par-5 15th. On Saturday, it was at there that his round went from promising to memorable.

His second shot bounded over the green, but Woods later said that was a calculation, not a mistake.

“If you’re going to miss, that’s the place to miss,” he said. “I practice from that spot quite a bit in practice rounds. It was a simple chip.”

Perhaps, but from just off the green, Woods had to deftly pitch his ball up a mound in the middle of the green and then let it trundle toward the front — with the right speed. But that’s what he did. When he converted the 18-inch birdie putt, Woods was briefly tied for the lead with Molinari.

The viewing spaces were packed at the par-3 16th when Woods, after an extended wait on the tee as he took eight practice swings, lofted a tee shot that bounced just left of the flagstick and skipped to a stop 5 feet away.

“I took a little time but got the right wind there at 16 and hit it right where I wanted,” Woods said later.

It produced his final birdie of the day and another ovation that would not be his last.

Woods played the final two holes cautiously, or, more likely, prudently.

And then he was walking across the 18th green, playing to a euphoric crowd that wanted more, and knew there was more to come.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

HILTON HEAD ISLAND, S.C. — Francesco Molinari feels worn out after collapsing on the final nine at the Masters last week and is looking to conjure up the mental energy to compete at the RBC Heritage.

Molinari, the reigning British Open champion, carried a two-stroke lead with seven holes left before a pair of uncharacteristic mistakes. He landed shots in the water on the 12th and 15th holes for two double-bogeys at Augusta National that dropped him from contention into a tie for fifth, two shots behind winner Tiger Woods.

 Molinari acknowledged Wednesday that he is still seeking the spark to move past last Sunday and get him going at Harbour Town Golf Links.

"You try," he said. "You're never quite sure how long that's going to take."

Molinari won't have long if he plans to contend. He faces another stacked field that includes Masters' runner ups and Dustin Johnson and Xander Schauffele, along with Webb Simpson, who finished tied with Molinari.

In all, 11 of the top 30 players in the world, led by No. 1 Johnson, will tee it up to start Thursday.

Woods, who has only played in one RBC Heritage in 1999, is off this week.

Molinari said his mistakes were straightforward and easy enough to diagnose with a bad swing on the par-3 12th and a bad choice on the part-5 15th.

"But more than that, my concern is just having the mental energies to perform this week and be competitive against a really strong field. That will be the challenge for me," he said.

 Molinari, 36, has been a revelation, especially in majors, the last two seasons. He's posted four top six finishes, including his British Open win at Carnoustie last July, over his past six major tournaments after never finishing better than ninth in his first 32 such appearances.

Johnson was pleased with his performance at Augusta, despite missing a birdie putt on the 72nd hole that might have tied him with Woods.

"Obviously, one stroke, definitely could've found that somewhere," Johnson said. "But all in all, it was a good week and I played well when I needed to."

Johnson, a South Carolina native, returned to Harbour Town last year for the first time in almost a decade and finished tied for 16th, his best RBC Heritage showing in three appearances. The speculation on Johnson's extended absence are similar to theories about why Woods does not play here — tight, unforgiving fairways where positioning shots is as important as bombing them a long way.

"If I'm playing well, I enjoy any golf course," Johnson countered. "If I'm hitting the ball where I want to, no matter what type of course it is, I like it. This is the kind of golf I grew up playing. It's something I'm used to. Last year, I had some success and I'm looking to have some more success this year."

Simpson, too, believes his strong play at the Masters can continue this week. One of his two top-five career finishes at Harbour Town came last year.

"I know what to do around this golf course," he said. "It's kind of a quirky, tricky golf course, but I always love being here."

Despite last week's events, Molinari said he carries much more confidence into all his tournaments these days. His three PGA Tour victories have all come since last July, including a win last month at the Arnold Palmer Invitational.

"I've never been a guy who showed up on tour and started winning straight away," Molinari said. "Definitely the last few steps have been more mental rather than technical or anything else."

Molinari, ranked seventh in the world, will put that to the test when this tournament ends with three weeks off before returning to action at the PGA Championship at Bethpage Black in New York. Molinari backed up his British Open win with a sixth at the PGA last August and is anxious for the next one.

"I'll analyze with a colder mind what happened (at the Masters) and just move forward toward Bethpage," Molinari said.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — There was a time when getting your hands on Masters merchandise was nearly as difficult and rewarding as winning a Green Jacket.

There is still only one place in the world to purchase official Masters souvenirs and that is inside Augusta National at their Harrods-like merchandise store which is only open during Masters week, the 64 cash registers manned by a smiling, uniformed staff from dawn to dusk.

There's just one catch. To get in the store means having to first secure a Masters badge, one of the most coveted and hardest tickets to land in all of sport. For Thursday's opening round, asking prices were as high as $7500 on resale sites.

Yet there is no longer a need to stand in that long line with hundreds of other souvenir hunters as the queue snakes its way through a maze of lanes that would rival any major airport security screening area.

Now with a cell phone (forbidden to spectators at Augusta National) and a no-price-is-too-high attitude, you too can be the owner of a Masters green polo shirt with its iconic yellow silhouette logo -- and you won't even have to leave your couch.

A Masters coffee mug, dog bowl or crystal glasses are all just a click or two away as enterprising websites skirt Augusta National's monopoly by offering everything you can get inside the merchandise store at hugely inflated prices.

Sites like www.mmogolf.com and www.golfshopplus.com will take your order and have people on site at Augusta National fill it, guaranteeing your purchase is official merchandise complete with tags.

Aaron Behar, an owner of http://www.mmogolf.com, describes the operation as a "professional shopping service".

The intensely protective membership at Augusta National may call it something different but for more than 10 years, the two have peacefully co-exsisted, unlike the club's ongoing issues with ticket scalpers and resale sites.

"We are a shopping service and I want to make clear we are in no way affliated with Augusta Natioinal," Behar told Reuters. "We only provide a service and obtain merchandise for personal and corporate clients.

"We do this for a number of tournaments but the Masters is a very exclusive product, one you can only get if you are there.

"We are simply a shopping service."

Not surprisingly, there is a considerable mark up attached to muling merchandise out of Augusta National.

Bahr, like most patrons, gets his tickets off resale sites and as his costs go up, as they have this year, so do his prices.

A golf shirt that cost $95 in the store goes for $230 on the resale shopping sites while $35 T-shirts go for $60 and a green coffee mug that sells for $15 inside Augusta will fetch $60 outside the walls.

While Bahr has turned Masters merchandise resales into a business, there are no shortage of freelancers out there looking to cash in on the iconic brand.

On Kijiji and eBay, you can find everything from Masters golf balls to frosted plastic beer cups retrieved from garbage bins going for $3.99.

If you are having a Masters party, Goldbelly.com will ship the famous Augusta Pimento Cheese sandwich to your door with a two-pound pack costing $59.

Like everything at Augusta National, the club does not discuss money. That would be unseemly for one of the world's most exclusive organisations but some golf industry experts estimate the merchandise store generates between $35-45 million in sales.

Everyone who passes through the Augusta gates must saunter past the store on way to the first tee and few can make the journey without pulling out a credit card.

While there is a growing secondary market for Masters merchandise, the vast majority of purchases are still made by golf fans who simply want a memento of their bucket list achievement.

Bill Henberson waited 30 years in the Masters lottery for a chance to attend golf's first major, and marked the occasion by schlepping home three shirts, hats for grandchildren, a flag and a puzzle.

A group of four men said between them they had dropped roughly $2,100 on gifts for kids, friends -- and themselves. Of course, with the 20 hats they had tucked into their shopping bags, there was more than enough gear to go around. 

Another visitor walked away with T-shirts, hats, flags, magnets and cups, not bothering to look at the final cost.

"It's the only time my husband doesn't complain about spending," Henberson's daughter Jaima noted wryly.

 (Additional reporting Amy Tennery. Editing by Ian Chadband)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA Ga. (Reuters) - Augusta National patrons have proven for decades to be a different breed from fans at any other sporting event, providing a sort of golfing oasis for the world's best players each year during the Masters.

At Augusta National, where the Masters began on Thursday after three heavily-attended practice days, one might have better luck booking a tee time at the exclusive course than finding anyone doing things like shouting out of line or using a cell phone.

Augusta National has essentially managed to maintain a remarkable sense of civility and respect among those attending the Masters, despite operating in a time where sporting events often produce excessive fan behavior.

"It's quite refreshing to have everything in control," said twice major champion Martin Kaymer of Germany. "You know what you are going to get here. It's a very peaceful place.

"Everybody behaves perfectly fine, it's very respectful and I think sometimes we miss that in sport. So that's why it's a good week to come to."

Augusta National prides itself on tradition and while the club's strictly-enforced rules may not make sense to everyone who attends the year's biggest golfing event the list of no-nos are, for the most part, followed to a tee.

And so it is no surprise that the first page of the Masters Spectator Guide begins with a passage written by club co-founder Robert Jones in 1967 that addresses conduct, customs and etiquette.

"In golf, customs of etiquette and decorum are just as important as rules governing play," Jones wrote, going on to add that "most distressing to those who love the game of golf is the applauding or cheering of misplays or misfortunes of a player."

NO RUNNING

In many ways, Augusta National operates in a world of its own and has created an aura about itself that has appeared to permeate almost anyone who walks through its gates.

As such, you are unlikely to see people sprawled out on the course's luscious grass, and if you do it will not be for long as they will quickly be asked to sit up properly. Running is also considered unacceptable.

"There's something about Augusta National when someone walks through the gates, they know that it's a place of respect, of beauty, and honoring traditions and values of the game," said Augusta National chairman Fred Ridley.

"It's something ... I certainly hope never changes."

One member of the media at this year's Masters was asked to remove his New York Mets baseball cap while eating breakfast in the Press Building's dining room.

Even 2018 Masters runner-up Rickie Fowler fell foul of the hat rule when, as a 22-year-old Masters rookie, he showed up to a 2011 news conference at Augusta National wearing his cap backwards until a club member asked him to turn it around.

When it comes to cell phones, they are prohibited on the course and violation of that rule will subject the ticket holder to removal from the grounds and the ticket purchaser to the permanent loss of credentials.

And gone are the random shouts of "mashed potato" directed at golfers the moment after hitting their tee shots during other PGA Tour events.

WELL-INFORMED PATRONS

At Augusta National, such behavior is mostly absent among a cast of spectators that competitors say are well-informed of the intricacies of the game, respective and reserved.

"If every week (on the PGA Tour) was like this week it would be awesome," world number 10 Xander Schauffele told Reuters.

Those lucky enough to get tickets to the Masters do so not as a "fan" but as a "patron", and while the difference in the two is mostly semantic it is one Augusta National is adamant about as it considers each attendee a valued customer.

So polite are the patrons that many arrive early to set up chairs at their preferred viewing areas and return hours later knowing their seat will still be there waiting for them.

"It's a good thing," former FedExCup champion Billy Horschel said when asked about what it is like knowing there will be little to no outside distraction while playing the Masters.

"Fans need to have fun but they need to understand that we are still trying to make a living for ourselves out here."

 (Reporting by Frank Pingue; Editing by Toby Davis)

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

AUGUSTA, Ga. — World leaders and some of the most decorated sports figures alike flooded social media on Sunday to congratulate American Tiger Woods after he clinched his fifth Masters title.

"Congratulations to @TigerWoods," tweeted U.S. President Donald Trump (@realDonaldTrump), who earlier this year played golf with the Woods. "A truly Great Champion!" 

"Love people who are great under pressure. What a fantastic life comeback for a really great guy!," he added later.

"Congratulations, Tiger!" wrote former President Barack Obama (@BarackObama). "To come back and win the Masters after all the highs and lows is a testament to excellence, grit, and determination."

Woods, who had not clinched a major title in over 10 years, won by just one stroke on a day filled with wild swings in the leader board.

He now has 15 major titles to his name, second only to golf great Jack Nicklaus, who has won 18. 

"A big 'well done' from me to @TigerWoods!" tweeted Nicklaus (@jacknicklaus). "I am so happy for him and for the game of golf. This is just fantastic!!!"

Entering the day tied for second with fellow American Tony Finau at 11 under par, Woods produced a steady performance to overtake the field.

"I am literally in tears watching @TigerWoods this is Greatness like no other," tweeted 23-times tennis major winner Serena Williams (@serenawilliams). "Knowing all you have been through physically to come back and do what you just did today? Wow Congrats a million times! I am so inspired thank you buddy."

Three-time NBA championship winner Stephen Curry called the performance the "greatest comeback story in sports."

"Congrats @TigerWoods Let me hold one of those 5 jackets one time!" he said (@StephenCurry30).

"Congrats Tiger! What a performance," wrote six-time football Super Bowl champion quarterback Tom Brady (@TomBrady).

"A big BIG congratulations to @TigerWoods for winning the Masters!!" basketball great Magic Johnson (@MagicJohnson) posted. "The roar of the Tiger is back!"

(The story corrects number of majors won by Jack Nicklaus from 17 to 18.)

 (Reporting By Amy Tennery; Editing by Christian Radnedge)

Advertisement

