In a remote Himalayan town in northern India, a women’s ice hockey team comes together.

CreditCredit

Supported by

Photographs and Text by Hilary Swift

LEH, India — More than 11,000 feet above sea level, a group of 30 women spread out and got to work around an open-air ice rink.

Armed with shovels, brooms made from small branches, and hockey sticks, they cleared the surface of the New Rink after an overnight snowstorm. Billowing green nets, intended to keep the sun from melting the ice, hung heavy with white powder, sagging toward the surface of the rink. The women pushed and pulled at the fabric, using their sticks to thwack the net, hoping to dislodge its frosty burden.

Once the snow was cleared, it was time for the national women’s ice hockey team of India to start what the players call “camp.”

For 15 days, 20 national team players and 10 hopefuls trained in Leh, a remote Himalayan town of about 31,000 in the northernmost state of India. They were preparing for the Challenge Cup of Asia tournament, which was held in Abu Dhabi this week. 

They dream of playing in the Olympics, but that is a long way off. The Challenge Cup, the only international competition the team has ever entered, is for countries in the lowest division of the International Ice Hockey Federation. This year India was joined by the Philippines, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates. 

According to the federation, there are 311 female ice hockey players in India, the world’s second most-populous country, which has only five indoor rinks and a sports culture dominated by cricket and field hockey.

“Even our families are like, ‘What are you doing? Get a job,’” said Diskit Angmo, a 22-year-old at the camp. “Sometimes I get frustrated, sometimes I’m like, ‘What the hell?’ But then the passion comes up.” 

Most of the national team players are from Leh or other parts of the Ladakh region, which is sometimes called Little Tibet. Only one player — a goalie from Mumbai — comes from a large city. The players range in age from 15 to 29, and all but two are students. 

Camp has been a special experience for the team, which started competing in 2016. The players were also able to train for 20 days together in Kyrgyzstan ahead of the 2017 Challenge Cup. 

The rink where they practice every day is another example of their sport’s growth. It is one of two that opened last year. The players were used to skating on frozen rivers and ponds. When Adam Sherlip, a former men’s coach who helped the women’s team, first came to the area in 2009, there were only three ice rinks and there was very little interest in hockey, he said. 

Over the last decade, he has witnessed  a transformation. Now, he said, “all people care about in winter is hockey. So many new rinks are being built every year.”

There are hockey teams throughout Ladakh. The men’s national team, a mix of army and civilian players, is also based in Leh. A February tournament was organized by the police department and featured a women’s team from a school and another assembled by a local hotel. 

Harjinder Singh, the general secretary of the Ice Hockey Association of India, said the sport was “a magnet for youth to come together,” particularly in the winter months when all roads leading in and out of Leh are closed because of snow. There is only one way to get here: by air.

At this year’s camp, the members of the women’s national team slept, ate and socialized together at a rented hostel on the outskirts of town. During their  free time between morning practice and off-ice training, the women gathered around space heaters at the hostel, braiding one another’s hair, playing cards and napping. With 10 women per room, quarters were close.

Music came from their three bedrooms. One song, “The Cha Cha Shuffle,” the team first heard months earlier in Canada. The women traveled there for a hockey festival organized by Hayley Wickenheiser, a four-time Olympic gold medalist. The players rubbed shoulders with Wayne Gretzky, Connor McDavid and Jujhar Khaira, the N.H.L.’s only current player of Indian descent.

“Being an ice hockey player, it’s always a dream to come to Canada,” said Angmo, who wears No. 19 like her favorite N.H.L. player, Jonathan Toews of the Chicago Blackhawks. “I had to pinch myself when we saw Gretzky and McDavid. I kept on thinking, ‘This isn’t real.’”

In 2017 Wickenheiser saw a YouTube video of the women playing hockey with the world’s tallest mountains looming above them. In January 2018 she traveled to Ladakh with Andrew Ference, a retired N.H.L. defenseman who is the league’s director of social impact.

“It’s like playing hockey in heaven,” Wickenheiser said. 

The Canadians brought 100 bags of hockey gear, 25 of them coming from the National Hockey League Players’ Association.

The women’s team relies on outside organizations and crowdsourcing for equipment and funding. Because ice hockey is not played in many parts of India, the government has not recognized it as an official national sport, and thus does not provide significant financial support. 

“We are in the infant stage right now,” said Rinchen Dolma, 28, a forward.

None of the athletes, trainers or coaches on the team are compensated. The Ladakh Women’s Ice Hockey Foundation and the Ice Hockey Association of India paid for  room and board at the hostel and for a 10-day coaching camp with 130 girls in an area outside Leh. Another foundation, run by Sherlip, got sideboards for the New Rink from a club in Austria. 

With so few indoor rinks, India’s hockey season is almost entirely dependent on the weather.

Noor Jahan, 28, the team’s goalie, said the most important advancement would be getting a rink where players could train year-round. 

“Unless we have the best training facility, I don’t think that we will even win the Asian championships,” she said. “Forget about the Olympics.”

Impassible roads in the winter affect the team’s diet; produce and fresh meat are hard to find. Until spring comes, the community — and the team — eats mainly lentils and rice. Skarma Lotus, a volunteer strength and conditioning coach, bemoaned not being able to introduce more protein into the player’s diets. “One egg is all that we can give to them,” he said. 

India hoped to win the Challenge Cup, but lost its first two games. The women ended their tournament by defeating Kuwait, 11-0, on Thursday. It was their third win ever in international competition.

Jahan said that, for her, competing in the Olympics was “a dream too big to see at this moment.” 

Instead, the dream she sees is coaching an Olympic team in the future. 

“We are the first generation of ice hockey players,” Jahan said. “And like I always say, we are definitely not going to be the last ones playing.”

Salim Valji contributed reporting from Montreal.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Lucas Aykroyd

Vacant red seats outnumbered spectators at a recent Toronto Furies home game. Just 310 people showed up that day at Mastercard Centre, the 1,000-seat practice facility of the N.H.L.’s Toronto Maple Leafs. The turnout was typical for the Furies, one of six clubs in the Canadian Women’s Hockey League.

Sami Jo Small, the Furies’ first-year general manager, often sees larger crowds at her motivational speaking engagements. A three-time Olympian for Canada, she does more than 50 appearances a year across North America for corporate clients.

That’s how Small, 42, makes her living. Running the Furies is largely a volunteer activity, for now.

Through eight seasons as a Furies goaltender, Small saw the difficulties of drawing an audience. She took over the front office in hopes of building something bigger, an enterprise that could pay decent wages to its staff members.

“I wanted people that are willing to put in the time and effort, because they see value in it,” Small said. “Eventually, my hope is that I can pay these people what they’re actually worth. At the moment, we can’t do that. We have to sort of acknowledge that reality right now.”

Small and five other players founded the league in 2007, and she will concede that she expected it to be further along.

Toronto is perhaps the world’s most hockey-crazed city, but not only do the Furies draw a tiny fraction of the Leafs’ audience (about 19,200 fans a game), their attendance also falls well short of the numbers for the city’s minor league men’s team, the Marlies. After winning the American Hockey League’s Calder Cup last season, the Marlies are averaging more than 5,600 fans. The Furies have had several strong seasons, winning the championship as recently as 2014, yet the attendance remains so low that the league often reports it as a zero.

There have been significant advances recently in the Canadian Women’s Hockey League — which has a team in the United States (Worcester, Mass.) and one in China (Shenzhen). Last season, the players started being paid for the first time. Under a league salary cap of 100,000 Canadian dollars, players receive 2,000 to 10,000 Canadian dollars a season.

Also, several prominent members of the rival National Women’s Hockey League, which has five teams in the United States, defected to the Canadian league this season.

With the Furies, Small has noted another improvement, the kind many athletes would not welcome: tough analysis by the news media.

Though drawing attention is a challenge in Canada’s biggest city, where the Leafs are covered obsessively, Small said bloggers had written about women’s hockey regularly — and with an edge.

“When I played for the national team, I always felt like within the media, women’s hockey was treated with kid gloves,” she said. “It was, ‘Oh, it’s so great that you guys are doing this or accomplishing this.’ The only bad media written about women’s hockey was that women shouldn’t play hockey or women’s hockey shouldn’t be at this level.

“There was never media coverage that said: ‘Sami Jo wasn’t at the top of her game. She didn’t play her best tonight.’ We now have people at our practices, knowing the players, knowing what level they should be at.”

The Canadian Women’s Hockey League does not consistently report attendance figures. But the Montreal team, which draws the largest audiences of the four clubs in Canada, attracted 1,567 fans to its home opener on Oct. 13. Last season, when the league added the expansion franchise in China — Kunlun Red Star — to help develop women’s hockey in the country ahead of the Beijing Winter Olympics in 2022, the team averaged 2,000 fans. (When the North American teams travel to China, they stay for a series of games.)

By professional sports standards, Furies tickets are inexpensive. A 14-game season ticket costs 175 Canadian dollars, and regular-season games are 15 Canadian dollars each. By contrast, the average price for a single upper-bowl ticket at Scotiabank Arena for a Leafs regular-season game is 94 Canadian dollars.

The Leafs and the Furies started a partnership in 2012, in which the N.H.L. franchise invests 30,000 Canadian dollars annually in the Furies for equipment, uniforms and travel, and also to offset the costs of coaching. The club also invites the Furies to participate in various Leafs skills development clinics and youth programs, and the partnership expanded in 2015 to include the sale of Furies merchandise at the Leafs’ arena.

Small said that the partnership had also provided superior facilities for the Furies and that she had used them to help recruit players. “We have a great, dedicated dressing room,” she said. “We have a gym right there and a medical facility.”

Small, who played on a men’s hockey team at Stanford while working toward a degree in mechanical engineering, uses her home in Mississauga, Ontario, a suburb of Toronto, as her primary office, where she also handles administrative duties for her speaking career.

The Furies play weekend games and practice in Toronto from 9:15 p.m. to 11 p.m. on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays — more frequently than any other C.W.H.L. team. It is the only time they can get the ice. Small tries to accommodate her players’ educational, professional and family responsibilities.

Forward Anissa Gamble came to Toronto to pursue a doctorate in diabetes research, and defender Katie Gaskin is a chiropractic student. Defender Shannon Moulson — younger sister of Matt Moulson, a former Islanders forward — is an elementary schoolteacher.

“Shannon Moulson lives in Hillsburgh, so she has a one- hour, 15-minute commute home after practice, and then has to be at school at 8 o’clock in the morning,” Small said. “Do I think she’s exhausted? Yes. She’s constantly on the road.”

To help, Small made Wednesday practice optional. “When I think of Sami Jo, I think of how generous and approachable she is,” said Renata Fast, one of three Furies who played for Canada’s 2018 Olympic silver medalists. “She always makes time for that one-on-one connection.”

To raise money and build fan loyalty, Small offers skills clinics for women in recreational hockey leagues, charging them 50 Canadian dollars apiece to skate with the Furies. A recent event netted the club 900 Canadian dollars.

“I think we have a pretty big impact on them,” Sarah Nurse, another 2018 Olympian, said. “For them to come and tell us their stories about how they started playing hockey at 40, 45 years old and they just love the game, it’s amazing for us.”

Small said these recreational players constituted the majority of Furies fans, attending with their family and friends. She focuses her marketing on them, rather than on young girls working toward playing professionally. According to the Ontario Women’s Hockey Association, the province had 38,914 registered female players at all levels of the sport in 2017-18.

“The reality is that most of the young female players in southern Ontario have tournaments every weekend,” Small said. “Their parents are carting them off from one rink to the next rink. They don’t necessarily have time to come to our games.”

Just two C.W.H.L. regular-season games have been televised across the country this season, and Furies games are not broadcast on radio.

“It would obviously be nice if we had more of our games on TV and even more support from the Leafs and Marlies,” said Natalie Spooner, another of the Furies’ Olympians. “But I do think they try to support us the best they can. Hopefully, eventually we can get to the point where we’re more of a sister team and maybe play back-to-back games or something like that.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

After being deported from the United States as a collegian, Hector Majul has bounced around, most recently landing in Lithuania. 

By Tal Pinchevsky

Perhaps the only thing more unusual than being a Mexican in Lithuania is being a Mexican hockey player in Lithuania.

So the general astonishment that has greeted Hector Majul since his arrival in Vilnius, the Lithuanian capital, in late November does not surprise him.

At 24, he is a forward for the Hockey Punks, one of four teams in the country’s largely unknown professional league. That move was another unforeseen step on an unconventional hockey path, which shifted when Majul was deported to Mexico during his college career in the United States.

“He is an impressive skater,” said Boris Dorozhenko, Majul’s childhood coach and mentor. “The only problem for him was always his Mexican citizenship.”

Like a growing number of international athletes who want to pursue careers in the United States, Majul found that his immigration status — and what some view as suddenly stringent enforcement of technicalities — had become a major impediment. 

In a country that has long tried to attract athletes and artists with special talents, what once appeared to be a fairly clear path to at least semi-permanent residency has become a far more arduous road. The possibility of deportation can arise with just one unsatisfactory answer to an immigration official, whether spoken or written on a form.

In Majul’s case, an incorrect response a year and a half ago led to a dizzying journey back to Mexico, then on to Switzerland and now to Lithuania, with no promise of a return to the United States in the near future. 

Dorozhenko, who played hockey in the former Soviet Union, discovered a 6-year-old Majul in Mexico City after becoming a coach with the Mexican national program in the early 1990s.

Dorozhenko eventually landed a hockey job in Arizona, and Majul, 14 at the time, followed him. Because he was attending high school, Majul entered the United States with a student visa, then became a fixture at hockey clinics in the area, alongside a local standout named Auston Matthews. Drafted first over all by the Toronto Maple Leafs in 2016, Matthews is now among the N.H.L.’s brightest stars. 

Majul was allowed to stay in the United States after high school, first on an amateur athlete visa, known as a P1, then on another student visa when he landed at Curry College in Massachusetts to play Division III hockey in 2015. 

By then he was a star for Mexico in international competition. In his first appearance in the International Ice Hockey Federation’s Division II Group B world championship tournament in 2014, he tied for the team’s scoring lead and helped Mexico finish one win shy of promotion to a higher division. He was named the tournament’s top forward in 2015 and again in 2016.

“I know there have been professional players that have Mexican descent or Mexican parents,” Majul said, referring specifically to the N.H.L. (Matthews’s mother is from Mexico.) “But there has never been a Mexican-born pro hockey player. I want to be that guy.”

But on Aug. 22, 2017, as Majul returned to the United States from a trip home to see family, Customs and Border Protection officials at William P. Hobby Airport in Houston discovered a makeup box belonging to his girlfriend, Katy Weizman. An American, Weizman had accompanied Majul on the trip and returned to the United States the previous week. The makeup kit contained a week’s supply of Concerta, her A.D.H.D. medication and a controlled substance.

Majul said that the Houston Police Department had declined to further investigate his possession of the drug, but that he was detained and questioned that night and into the morning. According to an appeal filed by his lawyer, Majul told a customs agent that he had left Mexico “to pursue a career in ice hockey.” 

Based on this admission, Majul was found to have expressed an intention to violate the terms of his student visa. The visa was canceled, and he was deported after almost a decade of legally living and training in the United States. 

When contacted about this case, the Customs and Border Protection agency said in a statement that officers had found that Majul “provided differing answers when asked about his trip to the U.S. and the reason he departed his country of origin.” 

Majul’s lawyer submitted an appeal in September 2017, saying the officers had overreached in their decision. The appeal was denied. 

Marian Daugherty, who took Majul into her home when he first moved to the United States, set up a “Bring Hector Back” Facebook page and reached out to the office of then-Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona, to no avail.

Majul was left to train in Mexico City, unable to return to the United States until 2022 and without the services of an agent. But with only 1,552 registered hockey players in Mexico, compared with more than 562,000 in the United States, Majul knew he would need to go elsewhere to keep up his game.

Majul and Dorozhenko canvassed their hockey network. Their search drew the attention of Arno Del Curto, who for 22 years had led the Davos hockey club in Switzerland. Equipped with a 90-day tourist visa, Majul ventured to Switzerland. Within three weeks, he was told that the team wanted him to stay.

“It was a huge relief,” Majul said. “I’m going to be honest, I think I teared up a little bit when I talked to my parents.”

But immigration would again become a hurdle. To qualify for  certification, Majul needed to have been considered a professional before arriving in Switzerland. Because he had most recently played competitive hockey in college and  with the Mexican national team, he was deemed an amateur and denied a visa. The club in Davos appealed to the Swiss government, even offering to hire Majul as a skills coach in the hopes that might provide a legal workaround.

By November, with only five days remaining on his tourist visa and all his options exhausted, Majul went to train with a coach and former colleague of Dorozhenko’s in Serbia. Days later, he received an invitation to join Hockey Punks. 

The Lithuanian club signed Majul to a contract, provided an apartment in Vilnius and helped him stabilize his immigration status. In perhaps the most unexpected turn of this hockey escapade, Majul is not the only Mexican on the team. His countryman Arunas Bermejo joined the club while studying in Lithuania.

“It’s a steppingstone, something to help me get to the next level,” Majul said. “Usually when people say they’re going to Europe, nobody thinks of Lithuania or Vilnius.”

He acknowledged that the transition to life in Vilnius was difficult, especially considering the abrupt nature of his arrival. But he has come to enjoy his new surroundings.

“It’s actually a really nice town,” Majul said. “Great food, people are very friendly. I think the only downside is how cold it is.”

The average high temperature in Vilnius in February is 30 degrees — not frigid, unless your reference points are Mexico and Arizona.

Majul has been approved for worker certification that for the next year or two  will allow him to work within the Schengen Area, a region of 26 European nations, including Switzerland. That would make it easier for Majul to rejoin Davos for the 2019-20 season. (That hope was muddled when Del Curto announced his resignation in November.) 

Daugherty helped Majul enroll in online classes through Arizona State University, and he is working to complete his degree.

In his first professional game, on Dec. 22, a 5-2 loss to Kaunas, Majul registered an assist. In his first eight games with the club, Majul collected a goal and six assists. He has not given up on his pro hockey dreams, including a potential return to the United States.

“I think in North America I have this label of, ‘Why is a Mexican playing hockey? He should be playing soccer,’” Majul said. “Don’t get me wrong. Here it’s also a shock when they hear there’s a Mexican hockey player. But after they see me playing, they see the level that I have, it kind of speaks for itself.”

“I think that was maybe the way it had to go,” he added. “Maybe for me to be able to go on to the next level, I had to come and make it through here first.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Gary Santaniello

WORCESTER, Mass. — The Holy Cross women’s ice hockey team averaged nearly 20 victories over the last 10 seasons while hanging six conference championship banners at its home rink, the Hart Center.

The senior tri-captains, Tori Messina, Julie Matthias and Sam Girard, helped the team win one of those banners, and the Crusaders posted a 62-17-3 record in their first three seasons.

“We were so used to winning,” Messina, a defender, said.

But this season, the team’s first in Division I, Holy Cross has had to get used to losing.

It is 1-28-3 entering its final game on Friday night, at home against Providence. The other 34 Division I teams have each won at least two games.

The Crusaders have been shut out in 11 games and have been held to one goal in 14 others. They failed to score on their first 43 power-play opportunities after scoring at a 30 percent clip last season.

“No team I’ve had has ever faced more challenges,” said Peter Van Buskirk, who has coached the program for 19 of its 20 years, taking over in its second season. Before that, he coached the Holy Cross men’s team for 10 seasons between 1979 and 1997, reaching the postseason eight times.

The former athletic director Nate Pine said it had always bothered him that women’s ice hockey was the only sport of the 27 at Holy Cross that was not playing in Division I. And when Holy Cross’s former league, the New England Hockey Conference, decided it wanted only Division III institutions as members, the college began looking for a new hockey home.

Pine, who left Holy Cross in January to become the athletic director at Air Force, approached the Hockey East commissioner, Joe Bertagna, whose league had an uneven number of women’s teams, nine, including top programs like Northeastern, Boston College and Boston University.

Holy Cross, with fewer than 3,000 students, committed to providing additional financial support for the program, and in May 2017 Hockey East announced that the Crusaders would join the league for the 2018-19 season.

“As we continue to make investments over the next four, five years, we expect to be where we want to be,” Pine said in his final week at Holy Cross. “We’re not in this to be an also-ran.”

The news that Holy Cross would join Hockey East came just two months after North Dakota announced that it was dropping its women’s program, along with two other sports, for budgetary reasons. Before Holy Cross, the last new women’s program in Division I was Merrimack College’s, which joined Hockey East for the 2015-16 season.

Last September, L.I.U. Brooklyn said it would have a Division I team beginning in 2019-20, which would bring the number of those programs to 36 nationally. Northern Michigan is also exploring adding a women’s team. (There are 60 Division I men’s hockey teams.)

It is not unusual for a college team to struggle after moving up a division. Bertagna said he thought it was harder for a program to move up a level than to start a team from scratch. Compounding the difficulty for Holy Cross, it began this season with only one class that had been recruited for Division I competition.

Not only were returning Holy Cross players accustomed to winning, so were many of the incoming freshmen. Forward Carlie Magier won state championships for Belle Tire Hockey Club in Detroit, and goalie Jada Brenon won New York State titles while playing for the Nichols School in Buffalo.

“This is a new challenge,” said Magier, who is tied for second on the team with 11 points. “I was looking forward to it. We expected to have bumps in the road.”

One of those bumps came against Connecticut on Oct. 13, when some teammates expressed frustration with one another on the bench as an early lead devolved into a 7-2 loss. It was addressed immediately after the game, and now, Brenon said, “This team gets together better than any team I’ve been on.”

Surprisingly, Holy Cross’s lone victory came Nov. 30 at home against Northeastern, which was ranked No. 5 at the time and is currently No. 3. Down by two goals in the first period, the Crusaders rallied for a 5-3 victory.

Matthias called it “the most fun hockey game I’ve ever played in.” She added, “We finally got what we’d been working for.”

Messina said she was crying on the bench as the game wound down. “I don’t think I breathed the last 10 minutes,” she said, laughing.

Before practice on Jan. 15, Van Buskirk, 76, told his team he would retire after the season. He said that he had begun thinking about retirement last year as he was preparing for his second hip replacement but that he relished the challenge of competing in Hockey East.

“Our record this year doesn’t indicate how successful this journey has been for me and for the team,” he said. “They’ve been very good about focusing on the process, not the outcomes.”

Replacing him will be the associate head coach, Katie Lachapelle, who was hired in July 2017 after nine years as an assistant at Boston University. She has also coached national select teams for U.S.A. Hockey.

“She’s brought a lot of Division I experience, and her exposure to U.S.A. Hockey and anything new coming up has been a big advantage for us,” Van Buskirk said.

The junior forward Rachel Moore, the team’s leading scorer with 14 points, transferred to Holy Cross from Boston College.

Early in the season, she said, the team’s play was “timid, a little cautious, without a lot of confidence.” Now, she added, “we know we can stay with these teams.”

Maine Coach Richard Reichenbach said Holy Cross’s victory over Northeastern had gotten his attention. “You can’t do that on luck,” he said.

But, Messina said, the frustration of this season remains. “I think we all thought we’d pick up another win or two this semester,” she added.

In their first games back from semester break, the Crusaders lost a home-and-home series to Connecticut, 4-3 and 6-3, in which they led twice in the first game and were tied in the second period in the second.

The next Saturday, at home against Maine, they scored twice in the third period for a 2-1 lead, only for Maine to tie the score with an extra attacker with less than a second left. Holy Cross had to settle for an overtime tie.

What this season isn’t providing in victories, it is providing in perspective, as well as an appreciation for the course the team is charting for the future.

“I look at hockey so much different now,” Girard, one of the senior captains, said. “I enjoy the competition every time we play. I wouldn’t trade this for the world.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Gary Santaniello

For many years, the N.C.A.A. Division I men’s hockey tournament was a celebration of the sport’s aristocracy.

Increasingly, it is becoming a demonstration of the sport’s parity.

Of the 16 teams in this year’s tournament, which begins Friday, only six have won a national championship.

Arizona State, in only its third season playing a full Division I schedule, is the first independent to make the tournament in 27 years. Another first-time participant is American International College, a school of less than 2,000 undergraduates in Springfield, Mass.

Bowling Green State is in the tournament for the first time since 1990; the University of Massachusetts for the first time since 2007.

The fresh faces have come at the expense of college hockey’s traditional powers. For the first time since 1970, Boston College, Boston University, Michigan, Minnesota and North Dakota all missed the tournament. Combined, they have won 32 national titles.

A variety of factors have contributed to the flattening of the pyramid atop college hockey.

N.H.L. expansion and the growth of youth hockey in places like Illinois, St. Louis and the Sun Belt over the past couple of decades have deepened the player pool. Top-level recruits have more attractive destinations to choose from with the rise of programs like Penn State, Arizona State and Minnesota Duluth, which has won two titles since 2011 and is the top seed in this year’s Midwest Regional.

Two of the top six overall seeds in this year’s tournament — No. 2 Minnesota State and No. 6 Quinnipiac — were Division II programs in the 1990s. Over the last seven seasons, though, they have the most wins in college hockey.

Minnesota State has yet to win a N.C.A.A. tournament game in Division I, but Quinnipiac has reached two Frozen Fours and lost in the championship game to Yale in 2013.

Quinnipiac Coach Rand Pecknold, who earlier this year won his 500th game at the school, attributed the success of programs like his to focusing on recruiting “the right type of player.”

“We’re winning with a lot of kids nobody wanted,” he said. “They’re our bread and butter.”

He added: “Success depends on more than just having talent. You need an identity and a culture.”

A.I.C. Coach Eric Lang won only eight games in his first season, 2016-17. But last season the Yellow Jackets won a postseason series for the first time, and in 2018-19 they had the best regular-season record in Atlantic Hockey and won the conference tournament.

“Every team has to find their competitive advantage,” said Lang, whose team faces top-seeded St. Cloud State on Friday. “For us, it was going over to Europe to recruit. We’re probably 60th among the 60 Division I teams in terms of resources, so we have to turn over every rock here.”

A.I.C.’s roster features 11 players from seven European countries, including Norway, Slovenia and Ukraine.

While the most prominent programs continue to get more than their share of top N.H.L. draft picks and players from USA Hockey’s National Team Development Program, many of these players leave college after one or two years.

At rising programs, the rosters are stocked with players from the amateur United States Hockey League or the top Canadian junior leagues. These players not only typically stay in college for at least three years, but they also start their college careers at an older age. It’s not unusual for 17- and 18-year-olds to be playing against skaters six and seven years older.

The teams with older players have more continuity from year to year, as well as more critical experience in postseason play. Four teams in the tournament — Minnesota State, Arizona State, A.I.C. and Ohio State — have an average age over 21.

“There’s a ton of really good players out there, and there aren’t enough stalls with only 60 teams,” said Arizona State Coach Greg Powers, whose team plays Quinnipiac on Saturday. “And when you get older players, they’re ready-made for college hockey from the physicality standpoint.”

Michigan Coach Mel Pearson led the Wolverines to the Frozen Four in 2018 but finished 13-16-7 this season.

Referring to the changing dynamics in college hockey, particularly the balance between recruiting players the N.H.L. covets and building an experienced roster, Pearson admitted: “I don’t think we’ve adapted yet. We’re still trying to figure it out.”

“In basketball, you can win with three players,” he added. “In hockey, you need nine or 10 pretty good players for a chance to compete.”

Perhaps the team with the most daunting route to the tournament was Arizona State. With no conference affiliation, the team regularly traveled far for games, and most of its home games were played at a community ice rink with less than 1,000 seats.

The Sun Devils won only 23 games the last three years. This season they finished 21-12-1, despite road trips to Penn State, Harvard, Princeton, Cornell, Boston University, Rochester Institute of Technology and Minnesota.

Eight months after winning the national club hockey title in March 2014, Arizona State announced it would play as a Division I program for the 2015-16 season.

“We just jumped into it and had to figure things out along the way,” said Powers, who coached the club program after playing goalie for it in college. “We learned that it’s O.K. if you don’t have the answers right away.”

The players from his first recruiting class are seniors this season. Powers said he expected to be playing in a new on-campus facility sometime during the 2020-21 season, an indication of the university’s commitment to hockey.

“It comes down to having the right people passionate about getting it done,” he said. “If you have the right people in place, you’re going to have success.”

Boston College won the last of its five N.C.A.A. titles under Jerry York in 2012 and has reached the Frozen Four twice since, but the Eagles have missed the tournament three years in a row.

“Everybody’s putting a lot of resources into their programs now,” York said. “I think it’s great for college hockey. We’ve got to keep growing our sport.”

An earlier version of this article misstated the number of teams in this year’s N.C.A.A. tournament field that have won a national championship. It is six, not five.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

Scotty Bowman had already coached six teams to the Stanley Cup championship when his high-powered Detroit Red Wings that won 12 of their first 14 playoff games couldn't get the puck away from the New Jersey Devils and got swept in the 1995 final.

"They just shut us right down," Bowman said. "We were shocked, but it happens."

The coach with the most Stanley Cup rings in NHL history wasn't as shocked to see the Tampa Bay Lightning get swept out of the first round this postseason after tying the single-season wins record set by his 1995-96 Red Wings and finishing 21 points ahead of the rest of the league. He wasn't surprised, either, when the same thing happened the same night to the Pittsburgh Penguins after they won two of the past three championships.

The defending Stanley Cup champion Washington Capitals are deadlocked with the playoff newcomer Carolina Hurricanes at two games apiece. If the Calgary Flames can't come back from a 3-1 series deficit against Colorado, it will mark the first time each conference's top seed is eliminated in the first round.

More than any other sport, playoff hockey is a much different animal than the regular season because of increased emphasis on scouting and preparation, fewer penalties and even-strength goals, and more all-out shot-blocking and sacrificing. The way games are coached, played and officiated changes enough that the Lightning can go from being the best team for seven months to gone in seven days.

"The ice shrinks and you have less time, less space, the hits are harder, guys are not preserving energy over the course of a game," said NHL Network analyst Mike Rupp, who won the Cup in 2003 with New Jersey. "You're exhausting it every shift."

Tampa Bay looked so exhausted after winning 62 of 82 regular-season games that it lost four in a row to eighth-seeded Columbus, which didn't even clinch a playoff spot until game 81. The Blue Jackets were by far the better team, and Bowman — who lives in Florida and frequents the Lightning's press box — saw a totally different Tampa Bay team without top defensemen Victor Hedman and Anton Stralman because it couldn't move the puck up ice without a strain on the top forwards.

Bowman compared it to what Detroit would've been like without Hall of Famer Nicklas Lidstrom, who hardly ever made a mistake with the puck and made everything happen. The Lightning ran into a tough John Tortorella-coached forecheck, struggled to control the game against the disciplined Blue Jackets and all their star power couldn't dig them out of a deep hole.

"During the season, Tampa would have the puck so much, the other team would get four, five or six penalties and, boom, their power play was at 28 percent and had the most goals in the league," Bowman said. "They were so hard to play against all year because they forced the other teams to take penalties. (Hedman and Stralman) are bringing the puck up, they're in the (offensive) zone. The game changes."

Star players also get much more attention in the playoffs. Tampa Bay's top scorers, presumptive MVP Nikita Kucherov, Steven Stamkos and Brayden Point, combined for five points against Columbus after averaging 1.3 a game during the regular season.

That problem isn't limited to the Lightning. Two-time playoff MVP Sidney Crosby was limited to one point in the Penguins' sweep at the hands of the New York Islanders, and Calgary's Johnny Gaudreau has one point through four games against Colorado.

Tampa Bay, Calgary and Pittsburgh all ranked in the top six in the league in scoring during the regular season. When Hall of Fame defenseman Scott Stevens does an autopsy on the Lightning and Penguins' quick playoff exits, he sees fundamental problems in other areas.

"I saw two teams that don't defend very well, really don't have a lot of structure in their D-zone and they didn't have anything to fall back on," said Stevens, who won the Stanley Cup three times with the Devils and now is an NHL Network analyst. "They weren't able to score goals, and they weren't able to defend and therefore they're not playing anymore."

Belying a common misperception, scoring isn't down much in the postseason so far: an average of 5.8 goals over the first 31 playoff games compared to 6.0 in the regular season. But after 77.8 percent of regular-season goals came at even strength, that number is 59.4 percent so far in the playoffs, which means each power-play goal is all the more important.

"You want to stay out of the penalty box," Stevens said. "There's teams that their power play might've been average during the year but they find a way to get a few in the playoffs and make a difference and that can win a series for you."

Or lose a series. Pittsburgh went 1 for 11 on the power play, and Tampa Bay went 1 for 6.

Of course, there are fewer penalties called this time of year. The NHL has said it wants officials to call games the same way in the playoffs, but referees don't want to overreach when games are so tight.

"I was always told that penalties are like money and it's like other people's money in that you should be frugal with them unless the action demands a call," said retired referee Paul Stewart, who worked 49 NHL playoff games during his career.

Stewart likens the first two rounds of the playoffs to a guy being so excited for a date that he gets a speeding ticket on the way, and because of that officials need to take extra care to rein in players. It's easy for him to understand why players feel like there's less room on the 200-by-85-foot ice surface than during the regular season because he has seen it up close.

"Players tend to cover a lot more ice because their speed level and their intensity level is up and where they might've dogged it a step or two here or there, they seem to put a little more churn in the butter," Stewart said. "They're getting from point A to point B a lot faster and then they're going to point C and point D where during the regular season they might only get to point C and now they're hitting D, E and F because they're all jacked up and they want to make sure that every 45-second shift is momentous for them."

Stevens said a great regular-season team's confidence can evaporate quickly and lead to a long summer of reflection.

"The teams that are undisciplined, the teams that get away from their game quickly and can't stay with their game tend to get in trouble because you become a little reckless, you don't manage the puck and then they feed the other team's offense and then they tend to find themselves chasing," Stevens said. "They just have no answer and it's frustrating for that team that can't find their game, has no answers, the adjustments don't work and you're still working hard, you're trying hard but you can't find a way to win."

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Pat Borzi

MINNEAPOLIS — The Minnesota Whitecaps, the newest and possibly best team in the National Women’s Hockey League, occasionally practice in an arena that is the closest thing to a women’s hockey museum in this hockey-loving state.

Ridder Arena, home of the University of Minnesota women’s team, features sprawling murals high at each end, honoring the program’s Olympians and All-Americans. The Whitecaps stars Lee Stecklein and Hannah Brandt, gold medalists for the 2018 United States Olympic team, appear on both. And the All-American mural includes one of the Whitecaps co-coaches, Ronda Curtin Engelhardt.

All were on the ice for a recent practice, with Engelhardt, 32, even joining her players for postgame sprints. But nothing in the arena acknowledges the Whitecaps’ leading scorer, Jonna Curtis, a left wing who was never a Golden Gopher, an Olympian or an All-American.

That the unheralded Curtis, 25, leads in the Whitecaps in goals (eight), assists (11) and points (19), rather than one of the team’s three Olympic gold medalists — wing Kendall Coyne Schofield is the third — illustrates the deep statewide talent pool. Minnesota was the first state to sanction girls high school hockey, in 1994. According to USA Hockey, more girls and women play hockey in Minnesota than any other state: close to 14,000 in 2017-18, the most recent season available.

“I’m happy to be here on a team with most of the girls I grew up playing with,” Curtis said.

Last weekend, the Whitecaps, with 13 Minnesotans among 17 players in uniform, secured the N.W.H.L.’s regular-season championship with back-to-back victories at the Boston Pride and the Connecticut Whale. That also earned Minnesota (12-4-0, 24 points) the No. 1 seed and home ice throughout in the Isobel Cup playoffs.

Against Boston, the speedy Curtis scored the winning goal with 1 minute 42 seconds to play, crashing the net from the left and putting in a rebound for a 2-1 victory. Curtis finished tied for second in the league in points, one behind Hayley Scamurra of the Buffalo Beauts. Leaguewide, she outscored all seven forwards in the league who skated for the American team at the Pyeongchang Olympics.

“It just shows how consistent she’s been all year,” Brandt said. “She started the year pretty strong and she hasn’t really let up, whereas the rest of us have kind of gone up and down a little.”

In a single-elimination semifinal on Sunday, the Whitecaps will face the Metropolitan Riveters. The league championship game is the next weekend.

No matter what happens, the Whitecaps, a semiprofessional team founded in 2004, made their N.W.H.L. debut season an unqualified success. The league’s first expansion team and its first franchise outside the northeastern United States, the Whitecaps sold out all eight home games at Tria Rink, the practice facility for the N.H.L.’s Minnesota Wild, which has a capacity of 1,200. League officials say the Whitecaps are the first team in its four seasons to turn a profit. Sunday’s game is also a sellout.

In the small circle of Twin Cities women’s hockey, Curtis is a familiar name. A two-time Minnesota Ms. Hockey finalist in high school — she, Stecklein and Brandt were up for the award in 2012, with Brandt winning — Curtis holds Elk River High career records with 280 points and 124 assists. All three attended summer youth hockey camps run by Winny Brodt Brown, the Whitecaps’ captain. Engelhardt was among the instructors.

“We knew each other pretty well,” Stecklein said. “I remember hearing about this girl who was really good, had really good hands and had a toe pull that beat just about every team.”

A toe pull is a stickhandling move, also known as a toe drag, where the puck carrier pulls the puck toward them with the toe of the blade to avoid a defender. In preteen hockey, only the most advanced players master it.

Curtis planned on attending college in Minnesota until Brown, her idol and mentor, suggested she check out New Hampshire while in that area for a tournament.

“I went and visited, fell in love with the people and the campus, and never looked back,” Curtis said.

She broke her collarbone three times, which limited her to 15 games in her first two seasons. But she gained a year back through a medical redshirt and led New Hampshire in points her final three seasons without missing a game. Her 21 goals as a senior earned her first-team all-Hockey East.

But the Wildcats never posted a winning record during her time, and USA Hockey never chose her for an age-group national team or international competition. Graduating in 2017 with a bioengineering degree, Curtis returned to Minnesota to work for a pharmaceutical company.

She signed up to play for a team called Minnesota Shenanigans in the Women’s Hockey Association of Minnesota, a popular Twin Cities recreational league. Long hours and weekend shifts at work limited her appearances, she said.

“I wanted to start a career and wasn’t thinking too much about hockey,” she said. “But that year I wasn’t playing, I missed it. Hearing the Minnesota Whitecaps were going to be a thing, I got excited. I had to try out.”

Past connections helped. The Whitecaps founder Jack Brodt, Brown’s father, was a Whitecaps’ co-coach and the general manager. Engelhardt left her coaching job at The Breck School in suburban Minneapolis to join Brodt, a neighbor from Roseville, Minn., on the bench.

No one had forgotten the fast-skating girl with the soft hands. “She was always in our loop,” Engelhardt said.

Teamed with center Katie McGovern from Minnesota Duluth and right wing Kate Schipper from Minnesota on the team’s No. 2 line, Curtis had at least one point in each game of Minnesota’s season-opening five-game winning streak. Her best performance came Jan. 20 against Connecticut, with one goal and three assists in a 9-0 rout.

Coyne Schofield, who participated in the N.H.L.’s faster skater competition during All-Star weekend in January, is unquestionably the fleetest Whitecap. But the 5-foot-4 Curtis is not far behind, Brandt said.

Stecklein remembered an early-season race-to-the-puck drill between Curtis and Allie Thunstrom, a three-time Hockey East selection from Boston College and a former speedskater, being neck-and-neck.

“We have the fastest team, and she’s right up there,” Stecklein said. “She’s shifty. She’s tricky. Doing one-on-ones, she can go in either direction very quickly. And her hands are so smooth that they don’t give anything away.”

A job change allowed Curtis a more flexible schedule to fit in weekend games and most practices. Curtis shares an apartment with her Whitecaps teammates Margo Lund and Sadie Lundquist. Skating on a winning team with three Olympians and so many faces from her Minnesota hockey upbringing thrills Curtis, who thought her best hockey memories were behind her.

“I’m happy to just be playing again,” she said. “I always dreamed of being in the Olympics, because that was the only thing you could do after college when I was young. Now little girls can dream of being a professional hockey player. It’s great to start that out.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

TULSA, Okla. — Prosecutors in Oklahoma have dismissed a rape charge against a retired Tulsa Oilers hockey player from Canada.

The Tulsa World reports that defense attorney Kent Hudson says he believes prosecutors don't have enough evidence to prosecute 50-year-old Doug Lawrence on charges of first-degree rape and sexual battery.

District Attorney Stephen Kunzweiler says prosecutors determined the case was "untenable," and dismissed the charges without prejudice, meaning his office could refile them later.

Court records show prosecutors allege Lawrence touched a woman's breast without her consent and raped her in 2017. Lawrence pleaded not guilty and was scheduled to go on trial Monday, the same day the charges were dismissed.

Lawrence, of Richmond, British Columbia, spent nine seasons playing for the Tulsa Oilers of the ECHL, a Double-A hockey league.

___

Information from: Tulsa World, http://www.tulsaworld.com

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Pat Borzi

ST. CLOUD, Minn. — John Mariucci and Herb Brooks, considered the godfathers of modern college hockey in Minnesota, never could have envisioned this in their lifetimes. But when Coach Bob Motzko left St. Cloud State after last season to succeed the retiring Don Lucia at the University of Minnesota, he arguably made a lateral move, not a step up.

Such a notion would have been hockey heresy in the 1950s and ’60s, when Mariucci coached the Golden Gophers to national prominence, or the 1970s, when Brooks led Minnesota to three N.C.A.A. titles before coaching the 1980 United States Olympic team to the Miracle on Ice.

The Gophers used to be the premier program in the state, but that has changed.

Last season St. Cloud State, Minnesota Duluth and Minnesota State qualified for the N.C.A.A. tournament, with St. Cloud claiming the overall No. 1 seed and Minnesota Duluth winning its second national title this decade. Minnesota, a five-time national champion, missed the 16-team tournament for the second time in three seasons.

And the balance of power continues to shift. St. Cloud State (27-4-3) remained atop both national polls this week, with Minnesota Duluth (21-11-2) fourth. Minnesota State (29-7-2) is second in one poll and third in the other. As the teams begin their conference tournaments this weekend, St. Cloud, Minnesota State and Minnesota Duluth are all in line for No. 1 seeds in the N.C.A.A. tournament.

Motzko’s Gophers had their moments, sweeping two-game series against highly ranked programs in Ohio State and Arizona State in recent weeks. But their 18-15-4 overall mark leaves them unranked and tied for 20th in the PairWise, a formula used by the N.C.A.A. Selection Committee to fill the tournament field. Minnesota may need to win the Big Ten tournament for an automatic bid this weekend to avoid another N.C.A.A. miss.

“We’re at the beginning stages of putting our footprint down,” Motzko said. “I know I’m taking over one of the most storied programs in the history of college hockey. There’s nothing holding us back except for ourselves.”

The change in Minnesota reflects a nationwide trend of newer programs usurping traditional powers. Of the seven teams with five or more N.C.A.A. titles, only Denver and North Dakota are ranked. Conspicuously absent: The Gophers, Michigan, Boston College, Boston University and Wisconsin.

What happened? More schools are benefiting from an expanded pool of players, coming from Europe and nontraditional American markets like California and Florida. And recruits have discovered more paths to the Frozen Four and the N.H.L.

Over the last eight years, Minnesota Duluth, Union, Providence and Yale won their first national championships. Since 2009, the five Minnesota Division I programs (Bemidji State rounds them out) combined for seven Frozen Four appearances. Only Minnesota State failed to make it, even as a No. 1 seed in 2015.

A decade ago, most recruits in the region considered the Gophers their best route to pro hockey. That is no longer the case. It hasn’t gone unnoticed that two members of Bemidji State’s 2009 Frozen Four team, Matt Read and Brad Hunt, play for the Minnesota Wild.

“In the day, Minnesota used to take whoever they wanted,” said Brett Larson, the former Minnesota Duluth assistant coach who succeeded Motzko as coach of the St. Cloud Huskies. “Now these kids know there are four other great options out there, and they can find the one that fits them — not just as a hockey player, but as a person too.”

St. Cloud, Minnesota Duluth, Bemidji State and Minnesota State share much in common. All play in relatively new or renovated facilities. St. Cloud renamed its arena for Brooks in 2013 after $13 million in upgrades brought it in line with similar arenas around the state.

It was Brooks, between N.H.L. coaching jobs, who stepped in as the Huskies’ head coach for one season, 1986-87, guiding the transition from Division III to Division I. A young Motzko, a former St. Cloud player, took his first coaching job as one of Brooks’s assistants. Brooks helped the university secure arena funding before leaving to coach the Minnesota North Stars.

“Herb Brooks’s vision of getting St. Cloud State to the Division I level was to create more opportunities for kids in the state to be able to play at that level,” said Larson, who grew up in Duluth. “That was the turning point. For Minnesota, and for the rest of us, it’s created a very competitive environment in the state.”

Motzko returned to St. Cloud as head coach in 2005 after four seasons as an assistant at Minnesota, a stretch during which the Gophers won their last two N.C.A.A. titles. The Huskies made eight N.C.A.A. tournament appearances in Motzko’s 13 seasons.

Reaching the Frozen Four in 2013, and joining the new National Collegiate Hockey Conference the following season, raised St. Cloud’s national profile. Their leading scorers, Patrick Newell and Robby Jackson, came from California.

“When my dad first told me that St. Cloud State was interested, I didn’t even know who they were, to be completely honest,” Jackson said. “All I knew was the Gophers.”

He neglected to wear a winter coat on his recruiting visit to campus, a sartorial snafu the assistant coach Mike Gibbons still razzes him about.

Now in his 19th season at Minnesota Duluth, Scott Sandelin has sent 21 players to the N.H.L. His .739 winning percentage in N.C.A.A. tournament play (17-6) leads active coaches and ranks fourth on the career list.

“When I first came in, Minnesota had always been strong,” Sandelin said in a telephone interview from Duluth. “It seemed like we were always behind them. That was good motivation to work hard and try to build your program to compete with them, try to get some of the kids they always seemed to get.”

Sandelin prefers players from the United States Hockey League or Canada’s top junior leagues who might stay four years. So does Minnesota State Coach Mike Hastings. And like Motzko, Hastings expanded his recruiting beyond Minnesota. The Mavericks feature three players from Germany, and next season two are coming from Florida. (Another recruit has a familiar name: Sandelin’s son, Ryan, a forward.)

In Motzko’s mind, the Gophers started slipping a decade ago when too many players began leaving early for the N.H.L. Minnesota traditionally signs more N.H.L. draftees than its in-state rivals. This year’s roster features 13, nine more than St. Cloud’s.

Huskies captain Jimmy Schuldt, a senior defenseman, turned down N.H.L. free-agent offers last summer for one more crack at leading St. Cloud to its first N.C.A.A. title.

Speed, depth and four-year loyalty were hallmarks of Motzko’s teams at St. Cloud. He said believes that formula can work at Minnesota.

“I’ve got great confidence we’re going in a great direction,” he said. “I’d like to get there quick.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Seth Berkman

In many ways, there has never been a better time to be a member of the United States women’s national hockey team.

Two years after the players threatened to boycott the world championship tournament over pay equity, U.S.A. Hockey, the national governing body, is paying them more than ever, about $71,000 each annually.

On the ice, the American women have continued to exceed the achievements of the men’s national team and won their second Olympic gold medal in a stirring final against Canada.

Members of the team have skated in the skills competition at N.H.L. All-Star weekend and served as analysts for N.H.L. television broadcasts. Participation in the sport among girls and women is skyrocketing.

But halfway through the labor contract with U.S.A. Hockey signed in March 2017, as the national team begins its pursuit of a fifth straight world championship in Finland this week, its players wonder whether the future of their sport is as bright as the present. Those concerns grew after the Canadian Women’s Hockey League, one of two professional leagues in North America, announced Sunday it would fold in May.

Although the American players negotiated gains in salary and travel and medical benefits two years ago, the “groundbreaking support” for girls and women’s hockey promised by U.S.A. Hockey in the contract has been slow to develop. The Women’s High Performance Advisory Group created in the deal has been largely invisible. Minimal promotion for the team and a lack of organizational diversity in U.S.A. Hockey also raise concerns from players and female alumni that little has changed.

“People are drooling for women’s hockey,” forward Kendall Coyne Schofield said in an interview late last year. “But the product we deliver isn’t being shown. There’s been a lot of lost opportunities, a lot of opportunities that haven’t been capitalized on.”

Those opportunities included high-profile media appearances before the Olympics like a national magazine feature, a major network documentary series and other live television offers, which U.S.A. Hockey declined, according to three people with direct knowledge of those projects. After the Olympics, some players were unaware that they were eligible for four-figure bonuses offered by Hershey’s for winning the gold medal.

U.S.A. Hockey’s executive director, Pat Kelleher, was not made available for an interview to discuss the women’s national team.

After the Olympics, the women’s team embarked on a weeklong national media tour, but players were frustrated that there were no plans for a post-Olympic exhibition tour. In an interview late last year, forward Hilary Knight lamented that the team disappeared when its popularity was at its highest.

Because of the talent disparity between North American teams and the rest of the world, there are not many viable opponents for the Americans, and Canada’s cooperation is necessary. Last month, the two nations finally staged a three-game exhibition series, with one game in the United States. An announced crowd of 9,048 fans attended the game in Detroit, which was also broadcast live on NHL Network.

But other avenues to increase exposure do not need Canadian co-signs, like merchandising. Nike, the official apparel supplier of U.S.A. Hockey and a company that champions equality in advertisements, does not sell jerseys of American women’s players or products specifically featuring female players. Neither does U.S.A. Hockey’s online store.

Coyne Schofield, one of the players who has been featured by the N.H.L. since the Olympics, is inundated with inquiries from parents about where they can buy apparel with her name. She has memorized a response with detailed instructions on how to purchase customized men’s items, even down to the six-week shipping time frame. That’s how Knight obtained replicas of her jersey for her family.

“That alone is so degrading,” Coyne Schofield said. “There’s no reason why anybody shouldn’t be able to go on usahockey.com and buy a Hilary Knight jersey, my jersey. Right now, women’s hockey is not accessible to consumers. It needs to be accessible in every fashion.”

Nike, which recently unveiled soccer kits for the 2019 Women’s World Cup that for the first time were specifically designed for women’s teams, did not respond to requests to discuss its women’s hockey apparel.

As with the jerseys, the American players handle much of their promotion themselves. Despite repeated requests from athletes, U.S.A. Hockey has not created social medial channels dedicated solely to the women’s team, as U.S. Soccer has. Olympians like Coyne Schofield and Monique Lamoureux-Morando worked as analysts on NHL Network and NBCSN. The players have lobbied the N.H.L. for more support for women’s hockey, particularly for its professionals, whose salaries range from $2,000 to $10,000.

The Women’s High Performance Advisory Group was supposed to be a conduit of influence for the players. Over the past two years, U.S.A. Hockey declined repeated requests to discuss the group.

The New York Times confirmed the participation of at least five women in the group, including hockey executives and members of the 2018 Olympic team. Multiple people with knowledge of meetings said the group was stagnant in its first year and only recently began having meaningful conversations. One player said she was unsure if she was allowed to talk about the group.

In March, the N.H.L. and the N.H.L. Players’ Association announced the formation of their own Female Hockey Advisory Committee with the goal “to accelerate the growth” of hockey for girls and women in North America, and named 11 members, all women. They include Michele Amidon, a former director for women’s hockey at U.S.A. Hockey, and several former members of the U.S. national women’s team.

But women’s representation remains lacking in U.S.A. Hockey’s leadership.

Of all American Winter Olympic governing sports bodies, U.S.A. Hockey has the lowest percentage of women on its board of directors (17.58 percent) and is the worst at reaching its benchmark for female hires, according to the most recent data available from the United States Olympic Committee.

There are full-fledged councils within U.S.A. Hockey devoted to youth, adult and junior hockey, but none specifically for girls and women. Decisions related to girls’ and women’s hockey are administered by the youth council, which is led by a man and where only four of the 25 members are women. There are also no women on the organization’s marketing council.

Proponents for U.S. women’s hockey have long struggled to have their voices heard. Lynn Olson became the first woman hired to work for U.S.A. Hockey’s girls and women’s section back in 1988, but it served only as an advisory panel to the board of directors.

During her tenure, which ended in 2013, Olson described U.S.A. Hockey as being run like a “good old boys club.” She was sometimes denied funds to hold meetings for her panel, so she put up her own money. Olson also said she tried to make the section a full-fledged council, which would provide more influence, writing up legislation that never passed.

Olson noted that more women wanted to be involved in U.S.A. Hockey, but had a hard time getting elected to positions of power. “You need to change the minds of males in the room,” she said.

Veteran leaders of the hockey team expressed faith that the culture could change under Kelleher, who was named U.S.A. Hockey’s executive director in April 2017. In recent months, he met with players in Maine, Chicago and Michigan.

“We hadn’t had that in the past,” Coyne Schofield said. “For me, it was a huge first impression.”

The United States national women’s soccer team, an inspiration for the hockey team in its fight for equality, was so frustrated with the lack of progress on a number of issues that the players recently filed a gender discrimination lawsuit against its governing body, U.S. Soccer.

Knight said she did not yet foresee a repeat of the fraught 2017 negotiations that led to the boycott threat and a fracture between U.S.A. Hockey and the women’s team that is still being repaired.

U.S.A. Hockey seems to be aware of the need for more gender balance. Don Gould, chairman of the girls and women’s section, said at the federation’s annual meeting that the organizational culture must evolve to advance opportunities for girls and women, socially and in sport.

“This objective cannot be realized without first creating an environment that values them equally at every level,” Gould said. “Whether we work on the bench or in the boardroom, this is our first obligation.”

But nine of 10 members of U.S.A. Hockey’s committee that nominates candidates to become officers of the organization are men.

“There are great people at the top that care about women’s hockey, but you absolutely don’t have the numbers to have a real change,” said Angela Ruggiero, one of the most accomplished American hockey players and a former member of the International Olympic Committee Athletes’ Commission. “We have an extremely long way to go.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

Hilary Knight put aside the jet lag and fresh memories of helping the United States win its latest world hockey championship to begin looking ahead to next season.

Yes, the star forward intends on playing professionally in October. The only question Knight can't answer is where.

"Yeah, exactly," she told The Associated Press by phone this week, shortly after returning home to Idaho after a 2-1 shootout victory over host Finland in the gold-medal game Sunday.

With a laugh, she added: "My mom would love to know that, too."

Knight is suddenly one of some 100 players without a place to play after the six-team Canadian Women's Hockey League last month abruptly announced it was ceasing operations as of May 1. Knight had just completed her first full season playing for the CWHL franchise in Montreal after spending two seasons with Boston of the U.S.-based National Women's Hockey League.

Knight is in no hurry to rush back to the NWHL, acknowledging she left the league in part by how the league operated, including cutting players' salaries in half a month into the 2016-17 season. With the CWHL's collapse due to financial reasons, the 29-year-old said she prefers taking a contemplative step back before determining what's best for her and the sport.

"I don't think either model has it figured out, to be honest," Knight said, referring to the CWHL, which operated as a nonprofit, and the private investor-backed NWHL.

"We want to be confident in something we're endorsing, and that's one of the reasons I moved to the CWHL," she added. "And now, there's a lot of different open doors, and we just have to figure out which makes sense for the future."

Knight isn't alone.

The five-team NWHL swiftly announced its intention to expand to Toronto and Montreal next season, but players on both sides of the border are using the CWHL's demise as a starting point for a big-picture discussion on the game's future, and demanding they have a say in it.

"I think it's kind of opened our eyes to something that we always knew was there, and to seize the opportunity to really ask for more for our sport," said goalie Liz Knox, the CWHL Players' Association co-chair.

"I see more often, women, especially female athletes, being told to be grateful for opportunity. And certainly we are," she added. "But at some point that line of being grateful has to be broken to ask for more or to demand for more. ... There's got to be better out there for us."

Without going into detail, the 30-year-old Knox said there have already been "a handful" of proposals kicked around in the three weeks since the CWHL announcement. Players and CWHL executives have been communicating via email and text, and Knox expects those discussions to ramp up now that the world championships are over.

Though time is an issue with NWHL teams preparing to restock their rosters next month, Knox said players need to present a united front in knowing they have leverage in determining their futures.

It's a moment not much different than two years ago, when Team USA players won pay raises after threatening to boycott competing in the world championships being held on U.S. soil.

"Certainly, what the U.S. girls did was courageous to say the least," Knox said. "But that's very much the situation we're in."

As for the NWHL, Knox said she doesn't have firsthand knowledge of what the plusses or minuses might be in joining the rival league. She does question whether players will eventually find themselves having the same struggles making ends meet.

"The NWHL seems comfortable. And maybe some players want that," Knox said. "So I'm not saying, 'No.' But I'm also saying if given the opportunity for more, I think most players would take that."

Ultimately, she said, the decision mostly rests on both countries' national team players because they have the most invested in the game.

The NWHL released a statement to the AP saying it "understands the players' desire to consider all options, and we are in the process of communicating with them about our plans for the upcoming season." The league is also open to addressing questions or ideas players might have.

The NWHL declined to provide any updates on its expansion plans into Canada, while noting the next season opens in less than six months.

"There is a lot of work to be done in a brief time," the NWHL said. "The opportunity for professional women's hockey in North America is enormous, and the NWHL is committed to building the league that the players and fans deserve."

In an email to the AP, U.S. national team member Jocelyne Lamoureaux-Davidson said players are on the same page. She added joining the NWHL "is too simple to assume" but only time will tell.

Lamoureaux-Davidson also noted how players have been outspoken in having the NHL play a role in overseeing a pro league.

Though the NHL financially supports women's pro hockey, it has been cautious in taking a larger role. Commissioner Gary Bettman previously said the league was hesitant about assuming control of the CWHL or NWHL or both because, as he put it, "we don't believe in their models." He emphasized the importance of starting with a clean slate.

CWHL interim Commissioner Jayna Hefford believes the NHL stepping in is the ultimate answer.

Though disappointed by the CWHL's demise, Hefford said the announcement has provoked serious discussion over the sport's future.

"This certainly appears to be the end for the CWHL, but I'm extremely optimistic for what will happen down the road," Hefford said. "I think it's time for change in women's sports, and we don't know what that change is yet. But I certainly believe the players need to be strong in what they want."

___

AP Sports Writer Teresa M. Walker contributed to this report.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

ESPOO, Finland — Natalie Spooner scored a hat trick for Canada in a costly 5-1 win over Russia on Monday at the women's world hockey championship.

Canadian captain Marie-Philip Poulin reinjured her left knee late in the first period. She limped to the dressing room and did not return.

Spooner also assisted on Blayre Turnbull goal. Rebecca Johnston had Canada's other goal. Russia's Liana Ganeyeva scored on a power play early in the third period.

Canada pulled even with Finland at 2-1 in Group A. Defending champion United States (3-0) is assured first place in the pool.

Canadian goalie Genevieve Lacasse made seven saves in her first start of the tournament. Canada scored five straight goals over two periods and held the Russians to no shots in the second.

In other games, Finland downed winless Switzerland 6-2; the Czech Republic topped Group B at 3-0 following a 3-1 victory over Japan; and France earned its first win, edging Germany 3-2 in overtime

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

ESPOO, Finland — Annie Pankowski scored the winning goal on a second-period power play Saturday, leading the United States to a 3-2 victory over Canada at the women's world hockey championships.

Hilary Knight and Kendall Coyne Schofield also scored for the Americans while goalie made Alex Rigsby made 31 saves.

The U.S. has six points and is alone in first in Group A. Canada dropped into a tie with Finland and Russia, all with three points apiece. Switzerland is winless in two games.

Brianne Jenner had goal and an assist in her 100th career game for Canada. Sarah Nurse also scored and Brigette Lacquette assisted on two goals. Goalie Emerance Maschmeyer turned away 27 shots in the loss.

In other games, Finland blanked Russia 4-0; the Czech Republic topped Sweden 5-3; and Germany edged Japan 3-2.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Ian Austen

OTTAWA — A truck driver whose inattention led to the deaths of 16 people aboard a youth hockey team bus in Saskatchewan last year, a collision that shook Canada, was sentenced to eight years in prison on Friday.

The defendant, Jaskirat Singh Sidhu, had driven a tractor-trailer laden with peat moss at about 60 miles an hour past five signs warning him to stop before the truck collided with a bus carrying the team, the Humboldt Broncos. Thirteen other people were injured last April in the crash, which occurred with such force that the bus flipped on its side and the two vehicles slid well off the highway before coming to a stop in a pile of rubble.

Many of the victims were young players who had come from across Western Canada to live with families in Humboldt, a farm town of about 6,000. They had joined the Broncos with hopes of either advancing to professional careers or getting college scholarships.

Canadians mourned the loss of so many young lives, which prompted an outpouring of donations from across the country for the survivors and families of the dead. Informal memorials, like symbolic hockey sticks left in front of homes, quickly appeared.

Mr. Sidhu had earlier pleaded guilty to 29 counts of dangerous driving.

“Families have been torn apart because of the loss,” Judge Inez Cardinal said at the hearing in Melfort, Saskatchewan, after reviewing more than 100 statements from victims. “Somehow we must stop this carnage on our highways.”

Mr. Sidhu, who worked for a tiny trucking company in Alberta, was on his first solo trip about two weeks after qualifying as a truck driver.

There was no sign that he was impaired by drugs or alcohol on the night of crash, nor was he using his phone as he sped past the corner’s oversize stop sign and its flashing warning light. Nothing on the corner obstructed his view of the approaching bus, nor did he notice that an oncoming car had stopped for it.

The judge said that Mr. Sidhu appeared to have been distracted by a flapping tarp on one of the trailers.

“This was not a momentary loss of attention,” Judge Cardinal said. “He had ample time to stop his unit.”

She added, “Seconds matter, attention to the road matters.”

At an earlier hearing, prosecutors said that investigators had concluded that it was impossible for the driver of the team bus, who was among the victims, to have avoided slamming into Mr. Sidhu’s truck.

The sentence was less than the 10 years that prosecutors had sought, but longer than most dangerous-driving sentences in Canada. Mr. Sidhu, who is 30 and lives in Calgary, Alberta, will probably be deported to India after his release from prison.

“The sentence is subject to varying opinions, but what is important is that Mr. Sidhu pleaded guilty, has shown remorse and has remained accountable for his careless actions,” Jamie Brockman, the president of the Broncos, said in a statement.

Since the collision, Saskatchewan and Alberta have introduced mandatory and more rigorous classroom and on-road training for heavy-truck drivers. They have also beefed up licensing tests.

Follow Ian Austen on Twitter: @ianrausten.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

The Flying Fathers were like the Harlem Globetrotters on skates. Now a group of priests are trying to bring them back. 

By Curtis Rush

PETERBOROUGH, Ontario — The Rev. John Perdue is only 33, so he does not remember much from the heyday of the Flying Fathers, a troupe of hockey-playing Catholic priests who played comedy-filled charity games beginning in 1964.

The Flying Fathers were the Harlem Globetrotters of hockey — touring North America and Europe, compiling more than 900 wins and only a handful of losses, and raising an estimated $4 million. They assessed penalties for skipping Mass on Sunday or “acting like a Protestant.” They brought out a horse, Penance, who was outfitted in goalie pads and trained to kneel reverently.

Sister Mary Shooter would put on a display of skating and puck handling, then throw off her habit to reveal her true identity: the Rev. Les Costello, who won a Stanley Cup with the Toronto Maple Leafs in 1948 at age 20 before retiring two years later to enter the priesthood.

By the early 1980s, Hollywood even took notice and tried to make a movie about the Flying Fathers for which Wayne Gretzky auditioned.

After the team’s 25th anniversary, in 1989, a number of Fathers retired and, although the team played until 2009, its aura dimmed.

Now Father Perdue, the vocations director for the Peterborough diocese and a former two-time junior hockey champion, is trying to bring it back. 

“When I was a young boy, they were very big,” he said. “Everybody in the Catholic world knew about the Flying Fathers.”

He has organized a new team of Flying Fathers and a tour, with three benefit games this week in Ontario and Quebec. If successful, this tour could be the start of something bigger.

That is a tall order. Priests do not enjoy the same popularity they did when the original Flying Fathers played, in large part because of sex abuse scandals in the Roman Catholic Church. Spectators may not be receptive to priests doing comedy routines. 

The new Flying Fathers know they can’t escape the shadow. 

“The church needs a good news story,” Father Perdue said. “There are many reasons why this is a beautiful thing to do.”

The Rev. Kris Schmidt, 32, from Fort Saskatchewan, Alberta, said, “The church, now more than ever, needs to see priests as human, and I think it’s a great way that this bridge can be formed.”

Some are not so sure the Flying Fathers can be relevant again.

“I think the glory days are over, but they may as well try,” said the Rev. Pat Blake, 84, the longest-serving member of the original team, who played for more than 40 years.

Father Perdue said encouraging more men to enter the priesthood was part of his motivation for reviving the Flying Fathers. When the number of seminarians declined in the original team’s waning years, it recruited police officers and firefighters to fill out the roster. 

Talent-wise, no one on the new team is like Father Costello, who played 21 N.H.L. games. He died in 2002, several days after hitting his head on the ice during a Flying Fathers game. 

The current players, who range in age from their 20s to their 50s, expect to be as skilled as a good high school team. Some grew up playing competitive junior hockey, and the Rev. John MacPherson, 55, reached the varsity level at Acadia University in Nova Scotia. Another, the Rev. Tavis Goski, 29, spent summers as a skating instructor. Many of the priests have stayed sharp by playing in weekly pickup games.

The priests have been recruited from across the country; with everyone so spread out, they have not practiced together.

Father MacPherson, from Kentville, Nova Scotia, who played with the Flying Fathers from 1988 to 2008, said that missing practice was never a problem.

“They practiced once back in the 1970s and lost the next game,” he said. “So they said, ‘The heck with that, we’re not doing that again.’ They just trust in their coach: God.”

In the days leading up to the tour, Father Perdue mapped out a script. Sister Mary Shooter, also known as the Flying Nun, makes a cameo in her flowing habit and scores on a penalty shot. She is played with gusto by a real-life nun: Sister Mary Catherine Perdue, who is Father Perdue’s sister. The tour has also introduced a Flying Monk, played by Father Perdue. 

The Flying Fathers are not straying from the original script — “an unusual mix of religion, hockey and comedy,” said the Rev. Tim Shea, 70, who played his first game in 1969.

According to a new book, “Holy Hockey: The Story of Canada’s Flying Fathers,” by Frank Cosentino, church leaders did not support the idea of the team in the early 1960s, believing that such showmanship was unbecoming of a priest. Eventually, Bishop Alexander Carter of Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, was won over.

The original Flying Fathers were founded by the Rev. Brian McKee and played their first benefit game on Feb. 20, 1964, beating a team from North Bay, Ontario, radio and television stations, 13-4, in front of a crowd of 3,126.

The Flying Fathers won the rematch in 1965, 16-6, and the official paid attendance was 5,030, the largest crowd for a hockey game in North Bay to that date, according to Cosentino’s book.

The Flying Fathers began traveling across Canada, the United States and Europe, playing 25 to 30 games a season. By the early 1980s, “Real People” broadcast the story of priests playing hockey on American television.

Cosentino wrote that several movie studios, including Francis Ford Coppola’s Zoetrope Studios, had showed interest in turning the story into a film. Gretzky auditioned, but his screen test did not go well, and ultimately a conflict over the priests’ portrayal doomed the project.

The team’s second act has been years in the making. Father Perdue began organizing a game between seminarians and a group of hockey players in the Peterborough area, northeast of Toronto. By the winter of 2017, that game had become the Father Costello Classic, named after the Flying Fathers’ star.

A member of the organizing committee for the classic suggested that priests should play in the game instead of seminarians.

“Oh, boy, are we really going to do this?” Father Perdue remembered thinking at the time. “There was this giant legacy that we would be stepping into. I said, ‘Guys, if we’re going to have a team of hockey-playing priests, you can’t do this and not invoke the legacy of the Flying Fathers.’”

Father Perdue called Frank Quinn, a retired police officer and former general manager of the original team.

With the organizing committee meeting in progress, Quinn, 75, came bursting through the door wearing a Flying Fathers jersey, a Flying Fathers jacket and a Flying Fathers hat.

Quinn got approval from former players and managers to use the name Flying Fathers, and the first test case was a benefit game in Ennismore, Ontario, in January 2018.

The Flying Fathers won, beating a local high school team, 13-6, but six of those goals came on a “touchdown” after a football made its way into the net.

The 650-seat arena in Ennismore was full. Among the crowd was the Rev. Vaughan Quinn, 85, a former Flying Fathers goalie but no relation to Frank, wearing an original team jacket. In his day, he would lie on top of the goal performing a juggling routine while play was in the other end.

“He literally had tears in his eyes,” said Barrie Schultz, 48, who has taken over as general manager of the Flying Fathers, “because he couldn’t believe this was happening again.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Seth Berkman

Since Sunday, when the Canadian Women’s Hockey League  announced it will cease operations, many have pondered how to elevate women’s professional hockey.

Some answers came on Tuesday, as the N.H.L. became one of the largest financial backers of the National Women’s Hockey League — the only remaining pro option for women in the United States and Canada — according to both leagues. And the N.W.H.L. announced it would expand into Canada.

Neither Dani Rylan, commissioner and founder of the N.W.H.L., nor a spokesperson for the N.H.L. would disclose the length and terms of the deal. The N.H.L. noted that it previously sponsored both women’s leagues, and has now increased its contribution to the N.W.H.L.

A sturdy future partnership between the N.H.L. and N.W.H.L. could dramatically increase exposure for women’s hockey. But former C.W.H.L. players and members of the Canadian and U.S. national teams are waiting to see if the N.W.H.L. remains the best option this fall or if another opportunity materializes.

To boost its appeal, the N.W.H.L., which launched in 2015, also announced Tuesday its intention to add teams next season in Montreal and Toronto. Those two cities formerly hosted C.W.H.L. franchises. The measure, which was approved by the N.W.H.L. board, would increase the N.W.H.L.’s reach to seven clubs across North America.

Rylan said that it is “incredibly important” for the N.W.H.L. to include stars from the C.W.H.L. teams in Montreal and Toronto — like Olympians Marie-Philip Poulin and Hilary Knight.

“We want to put the best product on the ice,” said Rylan, who met with N.H.L. Commissioner Gary Bettman Monday. “We knew it was so important to have a presence there so those top players have a place to play this fall.”

Knight, a star forward last season on Les Canadiennes de Montréal of the C.W.H.L. (and who left the N.W.H.L. after the 2016-17 season), declined to comment on Tuesday’s news, as she prepared to defend a world championship with the U.S. women’s national team in Finland this week.

Rylan acknowledged logistics like travel to Canada must still be figured out. The N.W.H.L. also is looking at increasing its schedule to 24 games, up from 17 this past season.

Until those issues and others are sorted out, Liz Knox, co-chair of the C.W.H.L. Players’ Association, said her constituents are willing to stay in a holding pattern, even if that means not playing come October.

“It seems like a strategic move for the N.W.H.L.,” Knox said. “It seems a little kneejerk to me because our league just folded two days ago. We’re dealing with a very heavy loss. If you lose a family pet you’ve had for 12 years, you don’t go out and buy a new pet two days later.”

Knox has been in contact with Anya Battaglino, director of the N.W.H.L. Players’ Association, to discuss the best steps for women’s hockey. Soon after the U.S. women’s team landed in Finland on Monday, it held a meeting with players from the Canadian national team. Since the two countries met in the 2018 Olympic final, both sides noted the need to work together to advance their sport.

“There will have to be changes in the N.W.H.L. model to make our players happy,” Knox said, referring to athletes from both leagues. In Nov. 2016, the N.W.H.L. drastically slashed salaries.

As of now, the N.H.L.’s involvement won’t resemble the N.B.A.’s backing of the W.N.B.A.: it does not include ice time, or major assistance in marketing, promotion or other business-related aid that would help the N.W.H.L.

The N.W.H.L.’s major sponsor over its first four years of existence was Dunkin’ Donuts. That deal recently ended, but Rylan said the two sides are in the process of renewal and that she expects their partnership to continue.

The N.H.L.’s cachet, of course, could open much bigger doors than the coffee and doughnut chain, including a larger network of international business partners, as well as possible new avenues for broadcasting and streaming options. More revenue from those outlets could also lead to an increase in N.W.H.L. salaries, which last season ranged from $3,000 to $10,000.

Battaglino, who said she was extremely proud of the N.W.H.L.’s growth, prioritized better pay as an issue the league should address as it now prepares to extend its reach farther than any women’s pro hockey league before, with a co-sign from the largest hockey influencer in the world.

“Women’s hockey players deserve a livable wage,” Battaglino said. “Women’s hockey players deserve the respect to be able to say, I am a professional athlete, proudly. Currently our athletes say, ‘I am a blank and on the nights and weekends I get to play professional hockey.’”



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Gary Santaniello

This weekend is Wisconsin forward Annie Pankowski’s last shot to go out a winner in college hockey.

She is a three-time finalist for the Patty Kazmaier Award, which will be given out Saturday to the best female player in college hockey. She has never won.

On Friday, she will play in the Frozen Four with the Wisconsin Badgers for the fourth time. She has never won a national championship.

Top-seeded Wisconsin (33-4-2) faces the two-time defending champion Clarkson (30-7-2) on Friday in the semifinals at Quinnipiac University in Hamden, Conn., with Minnesota (31-5-1) and Cornell (24-5-6) vying to play the winner. The title game is Sunday.

“All the previous Frozen Fours have been different, but this one is my last,” Pankowski, 24, said. “As a team, we’re really hungry to win it.”

A native of Laguna Hills, Calif., whose older sister, Ali, played hockey at Princeton, Pankowski started skating at 4 and played on her first United States national team in 2013, before four years at the North American Hockey Academy in Stowe, Vt. At Wisconsin, she was the team’s leading scorer her first two years, and again this year, with 25 goals and 47 points. She won four conference championships with the Badgers.

Yet Pankowski’s hockey career has had devastating setbacks. She was a final cut for the 2014 Olympic team. She did not play for the Badgers in the 2017-18 season as she trained with the national team. But she was cut just weeks before the team was to leave for the Pyeongchang Olympics, after all the players had been assured when training camp began that the 23-person roster was set. The U.S. went on to win the gold medal.

Pankowski called it “one of the most awkward, painful experiences of my life.” The day after she was cut, still “heartbroken, confused and angry,” she said, she began the drive back to Madison, where she knew she would find support among coaches, teammates and friends.

“Those were the people I needed to surround myself with,” she said.

She finished the season practicing with her Wisconsin teammates, and throwing herself into another passion: training dogs.

Since her second semester at Wisconsin, she has been a volunteer at OccuPaws, a local nonprofit that trains guide dogs for people with sight and mobility disabilities. The program requires that the dogs live with her.

“It’s something outside of hockey and school that’s not stressful,” said Pankowski, who often treats her teammates to dog visits at practice. “You can feel the excitement whenever I bring a dog into the locker room.”

Pankowski, the youngest child of two veterinarians, has logged more than 2,000 hours of volunteer time with OccuPaws. That is one of the reasons she is a finalist for another honor: the Hockey Humanitarian Award, which recognizes a male or female player who makes significant contributions to the community through volunteering.

Pankowski also works in the lab of Mark Markel, the dean of Wisconsin’s School of Veterinary Medicine, and she plans to start veterinary school there in August.

“She’s a rock star as an athlete, a student, a volunteer and a worker in my lab,” Markel said. “I think all her hockey experience, including all the international tournaments she’s played in, has given her the discipline to pull off this off.”

Veterinary school is a four-year program, but a yearlong commitment to play in the 2022 Olympics in Beijing is possible, with Markel’s blessing.

“If she needs a year off,” he said, “we’re totally supportive of her.”

For now, though, her focus is on Friday night and Clarkson, the team that beat Wisconsin in the 2017 title game. The Badgers were the top team in the country all of that season and outshot Clarkson, 41-20, but lost, 3-0.

This year, Wisconsin heads into the Frozen Four 10-0-2 in its last 12 games. Pankowski scored Wisconsin’s first two goals in a 4-0 win over Syracuse in the N.C.A.A. quarterfinals last weekend.

Watching the game online, Bill Driscoll, the director of hockey at the North American Hockey Academy, said he knew she would “take this game over.”

“She has an elite-level shot,” he added.

Pankowski was on the U.S. team that won the Four Nations Cup in November, and she will play for the Americans at the world championships in Finland next month. Despite her Olympic disappointments, she has won two gold medals at worlds, in 2015 and 2016.

“She’s very cerebral on the ice,” said Bob Corkum, the national team coach. “She knows the spots to get to. She’s not the fastest skater or the strongest player or even the most skilled, but she’s very well rounded. All she does is put pucks in the net.”

Whatever the results this weekend, Markel said, he had no worries about how Pankowski will handle them.

“I think her resilience is going to be a blessing for her the rest of her life,” he said.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

ESPOO, Finland — The United States soared into the gold-medal game at the women's world hockey championship by routing Russia 8-0 Saturday behind two goals each by Hilary Knight and Kelly Pannek.

The undefeated Americans will be going for their fifth straight title Sunday against Finland. The host nation jolted Canada 4-2 in the other semifinal.

"We really hit our stride in the second period tonight and were able to generate a lot of offense," U.S. coach Bob Corkum said. "We're one step closer to what we came here for and couldn't be more excited."

Goalie Alex Rigsby of the U.S. made 11 stops for her second shutout of the tournament.

Canada will face Russia for the bronze medal Sunday. Earlier in the tournament, the U.S. concluded pool play with a 10-0 romp over Russia.

The U.S. and Canada had met in all 18 previous world championship finals, dating to the first in 1990.

Finland goalie Noora Raty, playing in her hometown, made 43 saves in sending her country past the heavily favored Canadians. It was Canada's first semifinal loss at the women's worlds.

"We've been pretty confident that one day it could happen when we play a perfect game and I have a good game," Raty said. "So we finally scored three on Canada. That doesn't happen too often. If you keep believing in yourself, anything can happen."

Ronja Savolainen scored twice, including the empty-netter, to seal it with 37 seconds left. Jenni Hiirikoski and Susanna Tapani also scored for Finland.

Jamie Rattray and Loren Gabel countered for the Canadians, who beat Finland 6-1 Tuesday in the group stage. Shannon Szabados stopped 15 shots in her first loss against Finland in 18 starts.

The Finns scored their first two goals on power plays and pulled ahead 3-2 when Tapani scored with 3:42 left in the second period.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Seth Berkman

In a sudden blow to women’s professional sports in North America, the Canadian Women’s Hockey League announced on Sunday that it would discontinue operations on May 1.

The C.W.H.L., founded in 2007, operated as a centrally funded, nonprofit enterprise. It included some of the sport’s biggest stars, like Hilary Knight and Marie-Philip Poulin.

Laurel Walzak, chairwoman of the league’s board of directors, said that the C.W.H.L.’s management had realized in the past few weeks that funding would not be available to continue next season.

“We realized this model is no longer viable in the economics and the future of the C.W.H.L.,” Walzak said. “We voted on this Friday night.”

The C.W.H.L. had six teams spread across Canada, Massachusetts and China. Last weekend, it held its championship game, which was broadcast live in Canada and the United States. The C.W.H.L.’s closing leaves the National Women’s Hockey League, founded in 2015, as the only pro hockey option for women in North America.

In recent years, players have pushed for a single league. The N.W.H.L., which has five teams in the United States, will look into becoming a new home for some of the almost 150 C.W.H.L. players who will soon be without a team.

“We will pursue any and all opportunities to ensure the best players in Canada have a place to play,” said Dani Rylan, the founder and commissioner of the N.W.H.L. “Those conversations have started already and have quickly become a priority.”

Sunday’s announcement shocked C.W.H.L. players, many of whom are Olympians for the United States and Canada and are in Finland preparing for the world championships. Poulin and other players tweeted a statement saying that they had been informed of the closing on Sunday morning and that it would be “hard to remain optimistic” that they would find a new home.

In June 2017, the C.W.H.L. announced its expansion to China with the addition of two teams. The move was intended to present a wealth of sponsorship and other business opportunities. Beijing is preparing to host the 2022 Olympics, and the N.H.L. has made increasing its footprint in Asia a priority.

Three months later, the C.W.H.L. began paying players for the first time. Under a salary cap of 100,000 Canadian dollars, player stipends ranged from $2,000 to $10,000. That figure was the same this season, but there were signs that the growth of the league was not as bountiful as had been expected, including the Chinese clubs’ merging into one franchise this season.

Walzak and Jayna Hefford, who took over as interim commissioner when Brenda Andress left the organization last summer, said that China was a great opportunity for the league and that the clubs in Asia provided significant funding but that the expenses of running five North American teams, compounded with the exhaustive efforts to build sponsorships, ticket and merchandise sales in the United States and Canada, were straining the C.W.H.L. model.

“The infrastructure wasn’t there to make it work,” said Brant Feldman, an agent who has represented several Olympic and pro women’s hockey players. “You need a full-time staff to go out and market the sport, sell tickets, do sponsorships, understand integrated marketing communications and operate the professional sport. Neither league has that.”

Walzak said that the board was in the process of sorting out its finances from this season but that it expected that all payments owed would be made soon.

The C.W.H.L. had relationships with several N.H.L. teams and the N.H.L. players’ association, but the N.H.L. has always appeared hesitant to embrace professional women’s hockey, choosing not to get in between the two North American leagues. Last November, W. Graeme Roustan, a noted investor in hockey ventures who said he was the largest investor in the league, announced that he was withdrawing his funding.

In a statement on Sunday, an N.H.L. spokesman indicated that the news would not result in any changes from the league’s perspective. The statement said: “The N.H.L.’s position has been consistent for some time and remains unchanged with this news: we would consider starting a women’s league if there were no alternatives for women to play professionally in North America.”

The N.H.L.P.A. also issued a statement, which said: “While this news is certainly disappointing — for the fans as well as the players — we hope that appropriate opportunities for these players will be available soon. We wish the players all the best.”

Hefford said other stakeholders had expressed interest in continuing to help the sport. After the 2018 Olympics, American and Canadian players discussed the possibility of working together to reach the goal of a single league, but nothing materialized.

Digit Murphy, a former coach in the C.W.H.L., said that women’s sports should not have to be dependent on men’s pro sports for resources and that the current pool of players was strong enough to produce a successful model.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Dave Caldwell

An amateur men’s hockey club claims the ice at Sky Rink at Chelsea Piers in Manhattan at 4 p.m. each Saturday during the fall, winter and spring for a brisk 80-minute scrimmage, with the skaters divided into two teams, and no officials, face-offs or heavy checking.

When these players first step onto the ice, they look like any other group of weekend warriors, but the giveaway is the crest on a few of their jerseys: a shamrock with St.N and 1896.

This is the St. Nicholas Hockey Club, formed in 1896, one of the nation’s first amateur hockey clubs. The players are mostly New York businessmen in their 20s and 30s from Ivy League universities, and they play only a few games a year, but St. Nick’s lives on as an elite club.

“There’s a constant influx of players who replace the people who grow up, if you will,” said Jim Morrissey, 42, a former defenseman at Yale known as Moose, who now lives on the Upper East Side, works in finance and joined St. Nick’s after he moved to New York in 1999.

Morrissey sustained a knee injury during a St. Nick’s skate last year, putting him on the shelf.

“It’s probably a sign that I’m too old to do this anymore,” he said.

But he has vowed to return to the ice. He just loves hockey too much. And these are his friends, his “buds,” as St. Nick’s players call one another. He invited 15 of them to his wedding eight years ago.

Like many other amateur sports teams, St. Nick’s is sort of a social club, and the players who participate in the weekly skates and games make sure to bring beer for the twin purposes of rehydrating and recapping the first-to-five-goals games they just played.

“It’s not a beer league,” said Kevin Kaiser, 31, who joined St. Nick’s in 2011, after playing as a forward at Princeton. “Oh, we definitely drink after. But it’s high-level hockey, for sure.”

Participation is by invitation, and only former college and pro players with strong hockey pedigrees are asked to join. (St. Nick’s recently invited a woman who had played college hockey to join, but she declined.) Annual dues are about $1,000, most of which covers the ice time at Chelsea Piers.

Although professional hockey began to eclipse amateur hockey nearly a century ago, teams like St. Nick’s, especially in New York, formed a foundation for the sport’s growth outside Canada.

According to “Metro Ice,” a 1999 book by Stan Fischler and Tom Sarro, the St. Nicholas Hockey Club joined the New York Athletic Club, the Crescent Athletic Club of Brooklyn and the Skating Club of Brooklyn to form the American Amateur Hockey League in 1896.

St. Nick’s had won three A.A.H.L. championships 10 years before the New York Americans entered the N.H.L. in 1925. (The Rangers joined the N.H.L. a year later.) Hobey Baker, whose name graces the annual award that goes to the N.C.A.A.’s top men’s hockey player, played for St. Nick’s from 1914 to 1916.

Then Baker joined the United States Army Air Service and became a captain and a commander of an aero squadron in World War I. Baker, 26, was killed in a plane crash in 1918 about a month after the armistice. In 1945, he was the first American inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame.

The N.H.L. had only six teams from 1942 to 1967, so there were limited professional opportunities for hockey players, especially Americans. Curt Bennett and Herb Boxer were the first American-born players to be selected in the N.H.L. Entry Draft — in 1968.

So amateur teams were popular among American-born players who had exhausted their collegiate eligibility. St. Nick’s, which has long outlasted its three original A.A.H.L. colleagues, drew players from the Ivy League and other Eastern colleges who landed jobs in New York.

The St. Nick’s club played for many years at the St. Nicholas Arena, located at 66th Street and Columbus Avenue and built by the likes of Cornelius Vanderbilt and John Jacob Astor. The arena had one of the first refrigerated ice plants in the world. The club eventually moved to Princeton and to Westchester County, then to Chelsea Piers in 2006.

Pete Bostwick, now 84, played for St. Nick’s from 1959 to 1984 after starring at Middlebury College. He was a stockbroker who lived and worked in Locust Valley on Long Island, but he would join St. Nick’s teammates for practices at Hobey Baker Rink at Princeton, nearly 80 miles away.

“It was so much fun,” Bostwick said. “These guys were really into hockey.”

St. Nick’s spans generations of players. The brothers Steve and John Cook joined in the mid-1960s after playing at Princeton. Their father, Peter, played for St. Nick’s beginning in the 1930s.

“It was a club with a long tradition,” said Steve Cook, 74, a spinal surgeon who lives in Florida and Connecticut. “Everybody knew each other. It was pretty much an Ivy League event.”

John Cook, 80, who played for St. Nick’s before and after he played professionally in Germany in the late 1960s, said, “It was a nice way to meet different guys in different businesses who also had an interest in hockey.”

Steve’s 32-year-old son, Matt, joined St. Nick’s after playing at Union College through 2009, and for four minor league teams over two seasons. He still skates for St. Nick’s, but not as much as he used to, because he just became a father.

“You kind of grew up on St. Nick’s stories,” said Matt Cook, a credit trader who lives on the Upper East Side. “I didn’t know they still existed. It was like a new lease of life.”

St. Nick’s used to play several Eastern colleges regularly, but its schedule now consists of a handful of games against other elite-level clubs. This season St. Nick’s played a game against the Wissahickon Skating Club, of Philadelphia, and two against a team in Vail, Colo., in February.

The club no longer has a physical headquarters like St. Nicholas Arena, which closed in 1962 and was replaced later by WABC-TV studios. But the team does have an email list with a pool of more than 50 potential players for its weekly scrimmages.

St. Nick’s does not have the hockey reputation it had a century ago, or even more recently, when it won 10 national amateur titles in the senior elite, senior and open divisions from 1994 to 2005. But the players are determined to extend the club’s rich history.

“Some of us like to limp to work for a couple of months,” Morrissey said.



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Romance

By Jaime Green

The discussion of modernized farming methods might not sound like the stuff of romance novels, but that all depends on how handsome the man doing the talking is. Lisa Kleypas’s DEVIL’S DAUGHTER (Avon, paper, $7.99) is the platonic ideal of historical romance, witty and lush and tender all at once. Phoebe is a young widow and mother of two boys, just coming out of mourning for her beloved husband. She heads to her brother’s wedding festivities knowing that West Ravenel, her husband’s boarding school tormentor, will be there, as he’s the bride’s cousin. What she doesn’t expect is to find a man who makes her feel “that shaky, embarrassing, inexplicable desire to press her body intimately against someone else’s.” Even less expected (for Phoebe, but a delightful setup for the reader): That man is West Ravenel.

Kleypas wisely spreads the developments that follow over several months instead of cramming them into the wedding weekend; while Phoebe and West’s attraction is instant, their capitulation is not. West, a younger son, is manager of his family’s estate, and soon he begins to mentor Phoebe, who’s responsible for her own land until her sons come of age. West advocates for modernized farming, and even camaraderie with his tenant farmers — it is 1877, after all.

The gulf between the school-age West Ravenel of whom Phoebe had heard such horrific tales and the funny, generous, thoughtful man she comes to know is, thankfully, reconciled without any illogically hoarded secrets or overwrought reveals. Just as nicely handled is Phoebe’s first love — though her relationship with her first husband bloomed gently out of a childhood friendship, it’s never disparaged for lacking the heat that Phoebe feels with West. It’s a view of love as cleareyed and mature as everything else in this book, though in Phoebe and West’s case, Kleypas proves that cleareyed and mature doesn’t preclude pulse-raising. 

Paranormal romances can have a daunting buy-in. Elaborate world-building can make catching up mid-series difficult — and authors must walk a delicate line between high fantasy and unintentional camp. All of this makes Maria Vale’s FOREVER WOLF (Sourcebooks Casablanca, paper, $7.99) an impressive accomplishment: It’s Book 3 in a series but a welcoming starting point, and Vale’s world of werewolves, though grave, is never self-serious. Crucial to this success is Vale’s narrator, Varya, once an outsider, now a ranking member of the pack. (There’s a lot of lore to learn about Varya’s pack, from hierarchical structure to phrases in the pack’s Old Tongue, which looks a lot like Old English, but Vale keeps everything accessible.) Varya is intense and severe, almost caught off-guard by the feelings she develops for the lone wolf she finds one day, nearly dying of injuries he sustained when caught in an illegal trap.

[ Read Jaime Green’s last romance novel column ]

To back up for a moment, I should explain Vale’s wolves. They don’t call themselves werewolves — and scoff at humans who would — but that’s roughly what they are, able to shift between human and wolf forms, except for three days around the full moon, when all must be wolves. The pack’s greatest enemies aren’t meddling humans, but Shifters, who’ve abandoned the deep traditions of pack life — and the pull of the moon — to integrate into, and profit from, human society. Some pack members also live in the human world, protecting the pack’s legal and financial interests, but as a new threat from Shifters encroaches, they’re all called home to the pack’s land in the Adirondacks. And as that crisis escalates, Varya must keep the secret of the strange lone wolf she’s found, and of her growing feelings for him. That wolf, Eyulf, is appealingly affable, but Varya’s a surprising pleasure for a reader to spend time with. She’s often stoic and severe, with a reserve born out of early trauma, but she also has a powerful yearning for connection. Watching her come to terms with her own vulnerability is as moving, and central to the story, as watching her and Eyulf fall in love.



Like many romances, Sarina Bowen’s OVERNIGHT SENSATION (Tuxbury, paper, $15) hinges on some minor plot acrobatics to force its central couple to spend time together. It’s not enough that Heidi Jo Pepper is the office intern for the Brooklyn Bruisers, the hockey team on which Jason Castro plays. Well, it almost is, at first, when at a post-practice bar one night the two are about to give in to a long-simmering attraction. But then Heidi, a perpetual good girl thrilled with the possibility of being approximately 2 percent bad, overdoes it on tequila shots, and Jason has her crash on his couch when she refuses to go home so drunk, because home would be Daddy’s condo. And Daddy, Jason soon realizes, is the league’s commissioner. Daddy is also plenty pissed when he sees a gossip-blog photo of Jason carrying a very drunk Heidi back to his apartment.

Heidi’s already in hot water for dropping out of college, so Daddy downgrades her internship to a 10-week rotation through some of the hockey league’s most menial jobs — selling hot dogs, working stadium security, cleaning bathrooms. She can’t say no — there’s the hope of a permanent position at the end of her trials — but she can’t handle staying in Daddy’s condo anymore. And so that is why Heidi keeps living with Jason (and his teammate roommate). In practice, this plot feels elaborate but not overwrought, anchored by Heidi’s sincere drive to figure out who she is when she’s not the good Southern girl she’s been raised to be. Her slightly strange, slightly manic energy keeps her arc feeling fresh; Jason’s need to learn to talk about his feelings comes across as a bit more pat, but, sadly, isn’t unrealistic. And there’s so much more happening in this sprightly book — Heidi’s odd jobs, two entire unrelated scandals, plenty of hockey — that as soon as the momentum flags you’re on to the next play. 

The world of speculative romance is rife with werewolves and shape-shifters, angels and demons and oh so many vampires, but spaceships are woefully thin on the ground (and in the air). Even if that weren’t the case, even if some of us weren’t desperate for romance to colonize the cosmos, Jessie Mihalik’s splendid POLARIS RISING (Harper Voyager, paper, $16.99) would be a thrill of a book. Ada von Hasenberg is the fifth child of one of the three royal houses of the universe’s ruling Consortium. She’s been on the run for the last two years, fleeing an arranged marriage with the son of a rival house. When she finds herself about to be captured by her intended, she manages to escape with a fellow prisoner: Marcus Loch, the Devil of Fornax Zero, and the most wanted man in the universe. Ada soon discovers that the small ship they’ve stolen for their escape holds secrets that could topple the universe’s delicate balance of power.

Mihalik’s universe is vividly imagined, with exposition given with a refreshing directness (and no reliance on characters spouting awkward as-you-knows). The book is told entirely from Ada’s point of view, offering the reader no more insight past Loch’s cold exterior than Ada herself has. It’s a risk on Mihalik’s part — Loch starts out menacing and mysterious, and he always remains a bit opaque — but it pays off as the reader, right along with Ada, gets to treasure every small crack in his stoic facade. Besides, Ada’s a tremendous heroine, brilliant and capable but never infallible, and I wouldn’t want to give up a moment with her. The set pieces skew toward sci-fi, but the burgeoning attraction between Ada and Loch is just as important to the story. This is space-opera adventure and sweeping romance in equal parts, an enthralling and eminently satisfying book.

Jaime Green, the Book Review’s romance columnist, is a freelance writer and editor whose work has appeared in Buzzfeed, Popular Science, The Cut and Unbound Worlds.

Follow New York Times Books on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Field Level Media

Rick Nash, a No. 1 overall N.H.L. draft pick and a star for the Columbus Blue Jackets and the Rangers, has retired because of concussion-related symptoms, his agent said Friday.

Nash, 34, trailed only Alex Ovechkin and Patrick Marleau in career goals among active players with 437. He also had 368 assists in 1,060 career games.

“Due to unresolved issues/symptoms from the concussion sustained last March, Rick Nash will be forced to retire from the game of hockey,” his agent, Joe Resnick, said in a statement. “Under the advice of his medical team, the risk of further brain injury is far too great if Rick returns to play.”

The Columbus Blue Jackets selected Nash, from Brampton, Ontario, in the 2002 draft. He entered the league at 18 and spent the first nine seasons with Columbus. He remains the franchise’s career leader in goals and points. In 2012, the Blue Jackets traded him to the Rangers, with whom he spent six seasons, and he also played 11 games with the Boston Bruins in 2018 after being traded there in February.

It was with the Bruins that he sustained his most recent concussion, in March, though he did return for the playoffs. Another concussion, with the Rangers in 2013, caused him to miss six weeks.

He was a free agent entering this season but told teams at the start of free agency that he was not yet ready to play.

He led the N.H.L. in goals with 41 in 2003-4 and tallied a career-high 42 goals in 2014-15. He also won Olympic gold medals with Canada in 2010 and 2014.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Ian Austen

OTTAWA — The driver of a truck pulling two trailers laden with bales of peat moss roared past four warning signs and an oversized stop sign at highway speed just before it was struck by a bus carrying a Saskatchewan hockey team last April.

The collision at an intersection killed 16 people, most of them young players on the Humboldt Broncos, injured 13 and spread sorrow throughout Canada.

But the details of precisely what happened on April 6, 2018, only emerged on Tuesday after Jaskirat Singh Sidhu, the truck driver, pleaded guilty in a Saskatchewan court. The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation obtained a copy of a statement of facts negotiated by prosecutors and Mr. Sidhu’s lawyers.

The five page document, based on an exhaustive investigation by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, concluded that Glen Doerksen, the driver of the bus, had tried to avoid an unavoidable collision. The bus skidded nearly 80 feet before striking the truck’s trailers. There were no skid marks from the truck.

“The driver of the bus did not contribute to the collision,” the statement said. “The actions of Mr. Sidhu while operating the semi-tractor unit caused the collision.”

Mr. Doerksen was among the dead from the crash, which left both vehicles well off the road and showered the intersection with peat moss and debris.

Exactly why Mr. Sidhu did not heed the warning signs and failed to obey a four-foot wide stop sign with a flashing light is unclear. The investigation found that Mr. Sidhu had not been impaired by alcohol and had not been using a phone. The road was dry and clear, and weather did not impair his vision of the intersection.

All the statement found was that Mr. Sidhu had “failed to recognize that his vehicle was approaching an intersection and did not heed the stop sign.” The report estimated the truck was traveling at about 60 miles an hour through the intersection.

Mr. Sidhu, who lives in Calgary, Alberta, had only been driving heavy trucks for about two weeks. He had two weeks of prior training.

Outside of the courthouse in Melfort, Saskatchewan, on Tuesday, Mark Brayford, a lawyer, said that when he recently took over Mr. Sidhu’s defense, the driver said that he had wanted to plead guilty.

“I can’t make things any better but I certainly don’t want to make them worse by having a trial,” Mr. Brayford quoted his client as saying. “He wanted the families to know that he’s devastated by the grief that he’s caused them.”

The Broncos had been on a two-hour trip north to a playoff game in the town of Nipawin. The players came from throughout Canada and stayed with Humboldt’s families.

Long bus trips to games had been a regular part of life for the players, who ranged in age from 16 to 21. For many, the Broncos could have been a way to a college athletic scholarship or a pathway to a professional team.

One player still remains hospitalized in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.

Canadians have left hockey sticks outside their doorways in memory of the dead, who also included team officials. A fund-raising campaign for survivors and victims’ families raised more than $11 million.

Mr. Sidhu pleaded guilty to 16 counts of dangerous driving causing death and 13 counts of dangerous driving causing bodily harm. The maximum penalty for the death-related charge is 14 years and 10 years for the injury charges.

A sentencing hearing was scheduled for Jan. 28.

“If he spends a day, if he spends 10 years times, that’s irrelevant,” Scott Thomas, the father of Evan Thomas, 18, who was killed in the crash, told reporters outside of the courthouse. “He was guilty, he acknowledged that. That’s all I needed to hear.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Sarah Mervosh

A Minnesota man was eating a hot dog at a hockey game when, the authorities said, he wiped his mouth with a napkin and tossed the remains in the trash.

It was the moment cold-case investigators had been waiting for.

The authorities, who had used a genealogy company to identify the man as a suspect in an unsolved murder from 1993, dug the napkin out of the trash and used DNA on it to tie him to the case, court records show.

The man, Jerry Westrom, 52, was arrested last week by the Minneapolis Police Department and charged with murder in the death of Jeanne Ann Childs, a 35-year-old woman who was stabbed to death in a Minneapolis apartment nearly 26 years ago.

Mr. Westrom has denied involvement in the case, according to the authorities. A representative from a law firm representing him declined to comment on Sunday.

Federal and local authorities used genealogy to identify a suspect and then worked surreptitiously to retrieve a DNA sample from Mr. Westrom, a businessman who lives in Isanti, Minn., and has a wife and three children, according to The Minneapolis Star Tribune.

The strategy was popularized last year after the authorities used an online genealogy database to make an arrest in the case of the Golden State Killer, who had burglarized, raped and murdered people across California over decades. Since then, genealogical sleuthing techniques have led to arrests in cases in Washington State, Pennsylvania and North Carolina.

But the tactic has also raised ethical concerns about using genetic information from people who might have uploaded their DNA to find information about their heritage, without knowing it could help law enforcement officials track down family members.

GEDmatch, an open-source ancestry site used in the Golden State Killer case, updated its privacy policy after that case to make explicitly clear that law enforcement may access a person’s profile to solve murder and sexual assault cases. And FamilyTreeDNA, one of the country’s largest at-home genetic testing companies, recently apologized to its users for failing to disclose that it was sharing DNA data with federal investigators.

More than 15 million people have offered up their DNA to online genealogy services in recent years. While they represent a small fraction of all people, the pool of profiles is large enough to allow 60 percent of white Americans — the primary users of DNA sites in the United States — to be identified through the databases, according to researchers. Researchers believe that in the coming years, 90 percent of Americans of European descent will be identifiable, even if they have not submitted their own DNA.

At a news conference last week, Mike Freeman, the Hennepin County attorney, did not specify which service investigators had used, but said that “it was a genealogy company you see advertised on TV.”

He said he did not know whether it was Mr. Westrom himself or a relative who had uploaded the genetic information.

In June 1993, Ms. Childs was found dead in a flooded Minneapolis apartment. She was lying on the floor, wearing only a pair of socks, with the shower still running, according to the statement of probable cause in the case.

Ms. Childs, who had been working as a prostitute, was stabbed repeatedly, including after she had died, the authorities said. The authorities collected DNA from the crime scene, including from a comforter on the bed, a towel in the bathroom and a washcloth on the toilet seat, according to the statement.

But for a quarter of a century, the case remained unsolved.

A break came last year, when investigators entered DNA from the crime scene into genealogy websites and identified two possible suspects. One of the suspects, Mr. Westrom, had lived in the Twin Cities area in the early 1990s and had been convicted of soliciting prostitution in 2016, the probable cause statement said.

In January, officers began following Mr. Westrom and eventually tracked him to the hockey game. They watched him order food from the concession area and then wipe his mouth with a napkin, before placing the napkin in a cardboard food container and throwing it away, the authorities said.

DNA found on the napkin “was consistent with” samples taken from the 1993 crime scene, according to the probable cause statement.

The police arrested Mr. Westrom at his office on Monday.

Once he was in custody, the authorities collected another sample of DNA, which matched sperm found on the comforter and the towel in the bathroom, and could not be excluded as a match for the washcloth on the toilet seat, the probable cause statement said.

“We all hope Jeanne’s family can finally find peace as a result of this tenacious effort by officers and agents,” Jill Sanborn, the special agent in charge of the Minneapolis division of the F.B.I., said in a statement.

Mr. Westrom told the authorities that he did not know Ms. Childs and had not been at the apartment, and he denied having had sex with any women in Minneapolis in 1993, according to the probable cause statement.

In a court appearance on Friday, Steven J. Meshbesher, a lawyer for Mr. Westrom, said that the arrest had been premature and said his client intended to plead not guilty, MPR News reported. Records show Mr. Westrom was released on bail Friday night.

At the news conference last week, Mr. Freeman, the Hennepin County attorney, recalled how he had talked with the district attorney in Ventura County, Calif., about the genealogy used in the Golden State Killer case.

“I said, ‘You know, I bet we have some cases back home we can use this on,’” he said. “Well, we just found one.”

Follow Sarah Mervosh on Twitter: @smervosh.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

Toronto Maple Leafs center Nazem Kadri on Sunday was offered an in-person hearing by the NHL Department of Player Safety following a major penalty assessed Saturday in Game 2 of a first-round playoff series against the Boston Bruins.

That's a signal that Kadri, 28, could be facing a long suspension for cross-checking Boston forward Jake DeBrusk with 5:57 left in the game. According to the NHL.com, the NHL/NHLPA collective bargaining agreement calls for a player to be offered an in-person hearing if he faces a suspension of six games or more.

In 2018, Kadri was suspended three games for boarding Bruins forward Tommy Wingels in Game 1 of a first-round series. A 10-year NHL veteran, all with Toronto, Kadri has been suspended four times in his career.

The Bruins won the game 4-1 to tie the best-of-7 series at 1-1. Game 3 is scheduled for Monday in Toronto.

--Nikita Gusev, the reigning MVP of the Kontinental Hockey League, signed a one-year, entry-level contract with the Vegas Golden Knights and is expected to practice with the team on Monday.

Gusev, 26, has been on the roster of SKA St. Petersburg since the 2015-16 season. He led the league in scoring this season with 82 points (17 goals, 65 assists). He was released from his contract this week after SKA St. Petersburg was eliminated in the KHL conference finals.

The Tampa Bay Lightning drafted him in the seventh round of the 2012 NHL Draft. Vegas acquired his rights in a trade with Tampa Bay during the 2017 NHL Expansion Draft.

--The Colorado Avalanche announced the team has signed 2019 Hobey Baker Award winner Cale Makar to a three-year, entry-level contract.

The 20-year-old defenseman from the University of Massachusetts will join the Avalanche immediately for their first-round playoff series against the Calgary Flames. The series is tied at 1-1 and resumes Monday night in Colorado.

Makar, the No. 4 overall pick in the 2017 NHL Draft, just completed his sophomore season. He helped the Minutemen reach the NCAA Frozen Four title game and became the school's first player to win the Hobey Baker Award, college hockey's top individual prize.

--Field Level Media

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Tampa Bay had a historically good regular season. But in the N.H.L., being the best regular-season team is far from a guarantee of postseason success. 

By Curtis Rush

TORONTO — The former N.H.L. executive Brian Burke sat high in the stands at Scotiabank Arena last Thursday watching the Tampa Bay Lightning practice ahead of a game against the Maple Leafs.

“They remind me of the Dallas Cowboys in their heyday,” said Burke, who won a Stanley Cup as general manager of the Anaheim Ducks in 2007. “No weaknesses and a lot of star power.”

Tampa Bay went on to beat Toronto that night, 3-1, and two days later, closed out the Boston Bruins, 6-3, for its record-tying 62nd win this season.

With a 62-16-4 record, the Lightning tied the 1995-96 Red Wings for the most wins in a season. And Tampa Bay, with 128 points, fell just short of one huge benchmark — the record 132 points achieved by the 1976-77 Montreal Canadiens (60-8-12), who were regarded as one of the best, if not the best, N.H.L. teams ever.

Tampa Bay finished with 12 more wins, and 21 more points, than the next closest team, the Calgary Flames. The Lightning did not lose more than two consecutive games all season. 

But winning the Presidents’ Trophy as the best regular-season team is far from a guarantee of postseason success. The 1976-77 Canadiens won the Stanley Cup; the 1995-96 Red Wings did not. 

On the 32 previous occasions that the Presidents’ Trophy has been awarded, only eight regular-season champions, or 25 percent, followed up with Stanley Cup titles. The last one was the Chicago Blackhawks in 2012-13.

The Lightning begin their first-round playoff series against the Columbus Blue Jackets on Wednesday well aware that history may regard them as a bust — or not regard them at all — if they don’t win a championship.

Eastern Conference

Tampa Bay Lightning vs. Columbus Blue Jackets

Boston Bruins vs. Toronto Maple Leafs

Washington Capitals vs. Carolina Hurricanes

Islanders vs. Pittsburgh Penguins

Western Conference

Nashville Predators vs. Dallas Stars

Winnipeg Jets vs. St. Louis Blues

Calgary Flames vs. Colorado Avalanche

San Jose Sharks vs. Vegas Golden Knights

[Complete first-round schedule.]

The division-based playoff format, introduced for the 2013-14 season, does not help the Lightning’s cause.

Tampa Bay and Boston both play in the Atlantic Division and were the top two teams in the Eastern Conference. But one of them won’t get past the second round.

Lightning Coach Jon Cooper understands that success is often built on failure. Sometimes repeated failure. Under his tutelage, Tampa Bay advanced to three conference finals in the last four years and reached the Stanley Cup finals in 2015.

A dozen or so players are left from that 2014-15 team, which lost to the Blackhawks in six games. Back then, Cooper said, he struggled to stay positive as he exchanged handshakes with the winners.

In the handshake lineup was Scotty Bowman, a nine-time Stanley Cup winner as a coach and Chicago’s senior adviser of hockey operations.

Cooper will never forget what Bowman told him.

“You’ll be back soon,” said Bowman, who happens to have been the coach of the 1976-77 Canadiens and the 1995-96 Red Wings. “Don’t worry about it. I lost my first 12 Stanley Cup finals games.”

The Lightning lost the Eastern Conference finals in seven games the next year. Then last season Tampa Bay — already loaded with superstar talent in forwards Steven Stamkos and Nikita Kucherov, goaltender Andrei Vasilevskiy and defenseman Victor Hedman — added what it thought were the final two pieces by acquiring defenseman Ryan McDonagh and forward J.T. Miller from the Rangers at the trade deadline. 

But the Lightning lost to the Washington Capitals in the Eastern Conference finals in seven games. 

In their first full season in Tampa Bay, McDonagh has had a resurgent season, ranking No. 2 in the league with a plus-38 rating, and Miller tallied 47 points.

“This is the effect you’re getting,” Cooper said. “A year later, when everybody is more comfortable, and they know what grocery store to go to, now they’re here just to play hockey. There are no other distractions, and we’re reaping the benefits of last year’s trade deadline.”

Other off-season adjustments have paid dividends.

Tampa Bay has No. 1-ranked power play and penalty killing units, but last season the Lightning were ranked 28th out of 31 teams in penalty killing efficiency.

Rick Bowness, who oversaw the defensive unit, was let go along with assistant coach Brad Lauer. Derek Lalonde was hired with Jeff Halpern to work with the forwards, and Todd Richards was hired to focus on the defense.

During a nine-game stretch in November, the Lightning gave up 13 power-play goals. Richards called a players meeting. The players took ownership of the problems and became more attentive to the “habit reminders” the coaches like to drill into them, like finishing their checks.

“It takes away holes in your game when you’re constantly doing things correctly,” Lalonde said.

Cooper saw signs that Kucherov, 25, was filling holes in his game this off-season, when he stayed in the Tampa area and rented a rink by himself so he could skate five days a week.

“His hockey mind is so elite and the physical side is catching up,” Cooper said.

Kucherov finished with 128 points, the most for a Russian player in N.H.L. history and the most for a league scoring champion since Mario Lemieux’s 161 in the 1995-96 season. He is the favorite to win the Hart Trophy as the league’s most valuable player.

Kucherov’s emergence has taken the pressure off Stamkos, 29, to be the dominant star. Stamkos responded by surpassing the 40-goal mark for the first time since 2014-15, and he hit a career high with 98 points. Kucherov, who is sneaky quick with the puck and makes good reads, also helped center Brayden Point score a career-high 41 goals. 

Leading them all is Cooper, 51. Bowman, who follows the Lightning closely from his home in Sarasota, Fla., traces the team’s success to 2011-12, when Cooper showed an ability to put teams on a roll and keep them there.

He led the Norfolk Admirals, the Lightning’s American Hockey League affiliate at the time, to a record 28-game winning streak that culminated in a Calder Cup championship.

In March 2013, the Lightning promoted Cooper, who was a public defender in Michigan before making coaching his career. He has perfected the art of persuasion and negotiation with his players.

“He just has that balance in today’s N.H.L.,” said Lalonde, one of Cooper’s assistants. “He can be hard on players, but he cares about them too. The guys know he has their back.”

Cooper has claimed championships in the A.H.L. and in three junior hockey leagues. A Silver Cup. A Robertson Cup. A Clark Cup. A Calder Cup. 

The Stanley Cup has eluded him, but this year, just maybe, it could be Cooper’s turn. 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

Jon Cooper and Todd Reirden were coaching at the All-Star Game in January when the topic of winning the Presidents' Trophy came up.

With Cooper's Tampa Bay Lightning cruising toward winning it as the NHL's best team, he asked the Washington coach how to handle it. Reirden was less than helpful.

"I said: 'Good luck! I don't know what you're talking about,'" Reirden recalled with a grin.

Finishing at the top of the league comes with expectations, but only two of 13 Presidents' Trophy winners in the salary cap era have gone on to win the Stanley Cup and none since 2013. If this is the burden to bear for Tampa Bay, the Lightning seem OK with it.

"Nobody in there is sitting there thinking now we've got a path to the Stanley Cup finals," Cooper said. "As a matter of fact, actually the odds are probably grossly against us just in the sense there's going to be 15 other teams. Any time you go in somewhere and say, 'OK, we're going to pick this team' and somebody's got the field, usually the field is the teams to take."

Taking the field this time means betting against a team that was 21 points clear of anyone else in the league, has the top scorer and likely MVP in Nikita Kucherov, a Vezina Trophy candidate in goalie Andrei Vasilevskiy and looks built for this moment. Of course, so did the Nashville Predators last year.

When the Predators clinched the Presidents' Trophy against the Capitals, who won it the previous two years, winger Filip Forsberg said: "We've seen especially here that the trophy doesn't mean that much going forward."

It didn't, and Nashville lost in the second round to Winnipeg in seven games.

The Capitals have won the Presidents' Trophy three times in the Alex Ovechkin era — under coach Bruce Boudreau in 2010 and Barry Trotz in 2016 and 2017 (with Reirden as his top assistant) — and lost in the first or second round each time.

"Obviously it comes with a little bit of pressure," Capitals center Nicklas Backstrom said. "You are the best team in the regular season and you obviously have more work to do I think than just regular season."

Boudreau, now with Minnesota, said the pressure stems from constant questions players face because "they can't away from it" more than a feeling of internal superiority. But nine years after getting beaten by red-hot goaltender Jaroslav Halak and Montreal in the first round, Boudreau vividly remembers a Game 6 feeling of, "Oh my God, if we lose this game!"

They did. Tampa Bay defenseman Braydon Coburn remembers it clearly because it helped pave the way for his run to the Cup Final with Philadelphia. He and his Lightning teammates are keenly aware of other teams' missteps in the same spot they find themselves in now.

"You look to the past," Coburn said. "You try to take them as lessons. I don't think you try to psych yourself out in any sort of way. But I think you look back to that Washington series against Montreal, I remember it very well. It was Halak. He played out of his mind. That's the thing about playoffs is you never know what's going to happen."

What should happen based on 1,271 regular season games is Steven Stamkos raising the Stanley Cup over his head in June. But that was also the case for the San Jose Sharks in 2009 with Joe Thornton and Patrick Marleau in their primes, and they, too, lost in the first round.

"It's one of those things you can't let down your guard," said Marleau, now with Toronto. "You can't feel comfortable for a second. It's a brand new season. Anything can happen. There's bounces, inches. It's a game of inches. Just not to take your foot off the gas. If anything, it's the time to really bear down."

The Lightning clinched the NHL's best record with several games left in the season, which takes away some of urgency on the ice — in a bad way.

"We weren't playing playoff hockey — we were playing high-end, regular-season hockey, which is a big difference," said Minnesota's Eric Fehr, who was on that Capitals team in 2010. "It's just the intensity of taking the puck to the net and not playing as much on the perimeter and not trying to make fancy plays. You see the high-end teams in the regular season, they're making fancy plays, they're scoring 3-on-2 goals. You get to the playoffs and it's point shots, tips and battles in front of the net. That's the difference is you have to be playing that style of game come playoff time."

Tampa Bay was the highest-scoring team in the league, so it's an adjustment to playoff-style hockey but something the group is used to after reaching the Eastern Conference finals last year. Forward Adam Erne said the "sour taste" from a seven-game loss to Washington is a motivation, and more experienced teammates are trying to impart some knowledge about what to do next.

"Just keep a present mind frame," said defenseman Ryan McDonagh, who won the Presidents' Trophy with the New York Rangers in 2015. "That' been the best thing with this group all year is we've just focused on each day at a time and not look at big picture and what's going on around us, what's going on with other teams."

All well and good, but previous top teams have done the same and not been able to live up to the billing. Carolina captain Justin Williams played on the 2016 and 2017 Capitals Presidents' Trophy winning teams and acknowledged maybe it played a role in players gripping their sticks a little too tightly in the playoffs.

"It's really hard to get in and there's really no clear favorites once you get in," Williams said. "But playing the favorite is a little bit different with the expectations for you to win."

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

Second-seeded Minnesota Duluth scored once in each period and killed a pair of third-period penalties to beat fourth-seeded Massachusetts 3-0 in Buffalo, N.Y. on Saturday, claiming its second straight national championship.

Minnesota Duluth claimed its third national title in its history, after first doing so in 2011.

Bulldogs captain Parker Mackay opened the scoring on the power play at 3:51 of the first period, taking a pass from the point, deking and chipping a backhander inside the left post past Minutemen goaltender Filip Lindberg.

Mackay then set up the second goal, finding Mikey Anderson wide open in the slot, and Anderson buried a shot in the top right corner at 15:48 of the second.

After killing off two penalties in the third, Minnesota Duluth put it away with a short-angle attempt by Jackson Cates with 2:42 to play in regulation. The Bulldogs finished with a 31-18 advantage in shots, including a 25-12 edge through two periods, as goalie Hunter Shepard recorded the shutout.

Massachusetts defenseman Cale Makar, the Hobey Baker Award winner as the top player in college hockey, was one of four Minutemen with three shots on goal. He could soon join the Colorado Avalanche, who drafted him fourth overall in 2017, in their playoff series against the Calgary Flames. The series is tied 1-1 after the Avalanche won 3-2 in overtime Saturday.

--Field Level Media

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

Nikita Gusev, the reigning MVP of the Kontinental Hockey League, is joining the Vegas Golden Knights for their playoff run.

He signed a one-year, entry-level contract with the Golden Knights on Sunday and is expected to practice with the team on Monday.

Vegas and the San Jose Sharks were tied 1-1 in their best-of-7 series entering Sunday's Game 3 in Las Vegas.

"He'll join our group (Monday) and we'll see where it goes," Golden Knights coach Gerard Gallant told reporters. "I'm not going to make any promises either way. We'll see what happens. I like our team. I've liked our team all year. If we think we need him to put in the lineup, we'll see where it goes."

Gusev, 26, has been on the roster of SKA St. Petersburg since the 2015-16 season. He led the league in scoring this season with 82 points (17 goals, 65 assists). He was released from his contract this week after SKA St. Petersburg was eliminated in the KHL conference finals.

He has played nine seasons in the KHL and was part of Russia's gold-medal team in the 2018 Winter Olympics.

The Tampa Bay Lightning drafted him in the seventh round of the 2012 NHL Draft. Vegas acquired his rights in a trade with Tampa Bay during the 2017 NHL Expansion Draft.

--Field Level Media

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

The Vegas Golden Knights could be getting some offensive punch for their playoff push, and it could come from a player who has never played in the NHL, multiple outlets reported Thursday.

Nikita Gusev, the reigning MVP of Russia's Kontinental Hockey League, could be on his way to the United States after his current team, SKA St. Petersburg, was eliminated from the playoffs by SCKA Moscow.

Gusev, 26, had 82 points in 62 games this season to lead the KHL, according to NHL.com. The left wing scored 17 goals with 65 assists. Canada's TSN reported that Gusev's representatives were working on a release from his current contract, which officially expires at the end of April.

"I don't know much about him," Vegas head coach Gerard Gallant said, according to the league website. "(Golden Knights general manager) George (McPhee) mentioned it today. ... If he joins us, we'll see what's going to happen. Hopefully he does join us and gets some practice time in with us, but I have no idea where that's going."

Vegas trails its best-of-7 Western Conference playoff matchup with San Jose 1-0, with Game 2 set for Friday in the Bay Area. The Golden Knights are the defending Western Conference champions.

Gusev was a seventh-round draft pick by the Tampa Bay Lightning in 2012, but his rights were traded to Vegas in the 2017 expansion draft.

-Field Level Media

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

LAS VEGAS — The Vegas Golden Knights struggled when they opened the season and wound up in last place in the Western Conference at one point, a humbling stumble for a team that was just a few months removed from a charmed run to the Stanley Cup Final in its first year of existence.

With the addition of Mark Stone and four stacked lines, the defending conference champions may be hitting their stride at the right time as the playoffs arrive.

Vegas opens the postseason Wednesday in San Jose, a rematch of the second-round series won by the Golden Knights in six games last season.

Stone, a top-line talent who came to the team at the trade deadline, joined offseason acquisitions Paul Stastny and Max Pacioretty to form one of the most dangerous lines in the league. Vegas is 11-4-2 since acquiring Stone from Ottawa.

"You look at the entire group as a whole, we have depth, and a lot of teams have that," Stone said. "We're just looking to build as deep of a team as possible, and I think we've done a good job of that."

That includes what has been Vegas' top line the past two seasons: Jonathan Marchessault, William Karlsson and Reilly Smith — the team's top three points scorers, with 59, 56 and 53, respectively.

Stone leads everyone with 73 points, but 62 came with Ottawa, before he arrived in Las Vegas.

Coach Gerard Gallant doesn't see a difference in the lines consisting of his top six forwards, as he tends to alternate the two in the starting lineup.

"Truthfully, there's no second line for me," said Gallant, last year's Jack Adams Award winner. "There's a lot of talent in both of those lines and when both of them are playing well, everything's going right, it's a tough team to beat."

Then there's the bottom six, which on any given night has produced all the offense the Golden Knights need.

Alex Tuch ranks fourth on the team with 52 points, Cody Eakin is sixth with 41 points and the goal-scoring duo has given the Golden Knights depth at the third line, something they lacked last June when the Washington Capitals celebrated their first Stanley Cup title on Vegas' home ice.

The fourth line of Pierre-Edouard Bellemare, William Carrier and Ryan Reaves is the blue-collar line that can wreak havoc from a physical standpoint, or produce offense when the opposition least expects it.

Reaves leads the league with 305 hits, while Carrier ranks fourth with 277.

"We know what we can and can't do," Stone said. "We need to be playing our style of hockey at the right time, which is whenever the playoffs start. We've had spurts of great hockey, but as far as putting a 60-minute game together, we haven't quite done that yet."

The Golden Knights' depth, and offensive potential to break out in any given game, could cause problems for San Jose, which hasn't had the consistency it would like between the pipes. Out of 56 goalies who made 20-plus starts this season, Sharks starter Martin Jones ranks 52nd in save percentage at .896. His backup, Aaron Dell, is last at .886.

And with what appears to be a healthy roster heading into the postseason, Gallant has a stable of forwards he can call upon to play on any line, at any time. For the second year in a row, their mindset isn't about proving they belong on a specific line, it's about how eager they are to play alongside different teammates when needed to help the team.

"You have a good culture, good group of guys, good work ethic, you look around the room and everyone is humble and having fun," Eakin said. "There's gonna be times all year where guys are going down, guys are jumping around, lots of different line combinations. But you get a good, hardworking group of guys without egos, that's when the fun happens. That's when you can gel and bond and develop some chemistry.

"It comes from good, strong work ethic from the guys, good guys that want to do better for each other than just for themselves."

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

PITTSBURGH — The expectations were modest at first. The New York Islanders simply wanted to be better than the team that allowed the most goals in the NHL in 2017-18. Tougher to play against. Smarter on both ends of the ice.

Momentum built slowly. A midseason surge under new head coach Barry Trotz gave them confidence. The goaltending of Robin Lehner and Thomas Greiss, too. Still, even a surprising second-place finish in the Metropolitan Division and the franchise's best regular season in 35 years couldn't stop the Islanders from being underdogs heading into their first-round series against Sidney Crosby and the Pittsburgh Penguins.

So much for that.

Over the course of four games, the Islanders put on a defensive clinic that left one of the league's marquee teams searching for answers and left little doubt their turnaround under Trotz is very real. New York finished off a sweep with a poised 3-1 win in Game 4 that propelled it to the Eastern Conference semifinals for just the second time since 1993.

The Islanders held Pittsburgh to just six goals, trailed for less than five minutes the entire series and didn't buckle late in the clincher despite losing defenseman Johnny Boychuck and forward Cal Clutterbuck to injuries in the second period. When the final horn sounded, New York found itself shaking hands and moving on after needing a little over 12 periods to bring Pittsburgh's 13th straight playoff appearance to an abrupt and decisive halt.

"Obviously no one predicted this," Islanders forward Anders Lee said. "The guys in the room, we set out from day one to get better each day, to grow throughout the season and then when this time came here we were prepared as best as we could to be ready for this playoff hockey. I think we've proven that a little bit."

Or maybe more than a little bit. The Penguins — who know a thing or two about what it takes to thrive this time of year — didn't exactly make excuses after getting swept in the first round for just the second time in franchise history. The Islanders were faster, more determined and more disciplined from the opening puck drop of Game 1 right on through.

"We didn't execute well and made a few more mistakes than they did," said Crosby, whose assist on Jake Guentzel's goal served as the captain's lone point of the series.

It's the Islanders' way, one that carried them into a second-round matchup against either Washington or Carolina. Trotz is well aware of a chance he could find himself facing the team he led to the Stanley Cup a year ago. Yeah, it might be a little weird. There are worse problems to have.

"That's a special group that will always be a part of me," Trotz said. "But if we end up playing them, they're the opposition."

Whoever faces the Islanders will have to find a way to successfully navigate a defensive system that forces opponents to go through wave after wave of players in search of open space. The Penguins rarely found any while scoring just six times in four games and when they did, Lehner was almost always in perfect position. He stopped 135 of the 141 shots he faced and is getting a little tired of the notion what the Islanders are doing is a surprise.

"We have a good team," Lehner said. "We've been overlooked a little bit, but we have a lot of high-end skill on this team and we showed that this series."

Just as importantly, they showed it at the right time. Jordan Eberle scored in each game, including a shot that zipped past Matt Murray in the first period that evened the score just 94 seconds after Guentzel had given the Penguins an early lead.

"They get momentum, you hear the crowd cheering, they score first and you're able to get the next one and kind of quiet them down, that's big," Eberle said.

And the kind of thing the Islanders hope will carry over. They'll have at least a week off before continuing a season that will extend into early May. Heady territory for a group that had just one playoff series victory since 1993 before taking out the Penguins.

There's more work to be done. New York understands it doesn't play a particularly sexy brand of hockey. It also doesn't care. It works in the playoffs. That's more than enough.

"Early on I think a lot of people wrote us off," Eberle said. "They were a bit shocked. But we're confident in the way that we play. The way that the group is here, this is one of the tighter knit teams that I've played on. We love battling and playing for each other. You do that every night on a consistent basis and you can go places."

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

RALEIGH, N.C. — They traded punches with Evander Holyfield. They dunked a basketball on ice. They flopped around like beached whales.

The Carolina Hurricanes have done plenty of unusual things this season, and here is one more: They are preparing for their first playoff series in a decade.

That team dubbed a "bunch of jerks" over their wild, choreographed post-victory celebrations hopes to surge — or, perhaps more fittingly, Storm Surge — all the way to the Stanley Cup.

The Hurricanes, who open their first best-of-seven playoff series since 2009 on Thursday night at defending Cup champion Washington, are walking the fine line between savoring their rare-for-them accomplishment while not being completely satisfied with just making the field of 16.

"You never know when you're going to be back in this situation," 37-year-old captain Justin Williams said, "because making the playoffs is hard — as people in this area know."

Oh, do they know.

It has been nine seasons since the Hurricanes last skated in a springtime game that mattered. Only two franchises have gone longer between postseason appearances — the Florida Panthers from 2001-11 and the Edmonton Oilers from 2007-16, with each missing the playoffs for 10 straight seasons.

Yet first-year coach Rod Brind'Amour isn't just happy to be here.

"We're certainly expecting more — this isn't what we signed up for," he said. "We all understand it's a huge task, but we're not going into this series not expecting to win, that's for sure."

The only current Carolina player who was on the ice for the Hurricanes' last postseason series was center Jordan Staal — who at the time played for Pittsburgh, which swept those Hurricanes in the Eastern Conference finals.

To finally end that drought, Carolina changed just about everything, from the players on the ice all the way up to the team owner. Tom Dundon bought a majority stake in the team from longtime owner Peter Karmanos Jr. last January, then promoted Don Waddell to general manager and hired Brind'Amour — who, as captain of the title-winning team in 2006, was the first player to hoist the Stanley Cup — as head coach.

Along the way, the team's culture changed. Williams was selected as team captain after a failed experiment last year in which Staal and Justin Faulk shared the captaincy, and the players became more accountable to each other.

"Guys expect more out of themselves and expect more out of each other," Williams said. "And when we challenge each other to be better players, that's the only way to improve as a team."

They're also having more fun after games, thanks to those Storm Surges.

Each one started with a slow, exaggerated overhead clap and ended with a different skit or activity. They celebrated March Madness by bringing a portable basketball hoop onto the ice and Trevor van Riemsdyk threw down a one-handed dunk . When Holyfield visited as a guest, they brought him onto the ice and the former boxing champ pretended to spar with Jordan Martinook. They marked Hartford Whalers night by flopping around on the ice like whales.

And when veteran hockey broadcaster Don Cherry ripped the celebrations and called the Hurricanes a "bunch of jerks," they turned the insult into a rallying cry — even selling T-shirts with the slogan at the team shop.

Even as Williams announced the team's decision to halt the Surges late in the season, he left the door open for their return by calling them "unpredictable."

So was this playoff appearance. Just a few months ago, the Hurricanes were 15-17-5 on Dec. 30 and one point out of last place in the East.

Since then, they have gone 31-12-2.

"A lot of people that didn't watch our team all year, they were, 'What happened?' and I don't know that anything happened," Brind'Amour said. "The puck just started to go in. I still think the first 25 games were the best segment of our season, and yet our record didn't show it, so what do I know? ... I can't tell you the change. When pucks started going in, I think you could see they had a little bit more swagger."

So now, on a day usually reserved for melting the ice at PNC Arena, they were doing something different to it — placing the playoff logos inside the blue lines.

For Williams, who scored the winning goal in Game 7 of Carolina's Cup run 13 years ago and came back before last season to try to bring the franchise back to those heights, it's particularly satisfying.

"I think the atmosphere's going to be electric," Williams said. "Still to this day, (Game 7 was) one of the loudest buildings I've ever been a part of. And playoff hockey coming back to the area, people are going to be ready. I know that."

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

TAMPA, Fla. — The Columbus Blue Jackets rebounded from a dismal start to stun the team that had the NHL's best regular-season record.

Seth Jones scored the go-ahead goal on the power play to cap Columbus' three-goal third period, and the Blue Jackets rallied to beat the Tampa Bay Lightning 4-3 in Game 1 of the teams' first-round Eastern Conference playoff series Wednesday night.

"We can't get comfortable," Jones said. "Nothing is going to get easier. It's only going to get harder."

Jones made it 4-3 from the slot with 5:55 to play as the Blues Jackets erased a 3-0 deficit after the Lightning scored three times in the opening period.

With Columbus trailing 3-1 in the third, David Savard deked around Lightning defenseman Victor Hedman and scored 7:56 into the period to make it a one-goal game. Josh Anderson picked up a short-handed goal that tied it at 3 at 11:54.

The Blue Jackets became the 27th NHL team to overcome at least a three-goal deficit to win a playoff game in regulation.

Nick Foligno had the other goal for Columbus, and Sergei Bobrovsky ended up with 26 saves after struggling in the first period.

The Lightning, who matched the 1995-96 Detroit Red Wings for the most wins in a regular season with 62, got first-period goals from Alex Killorn, Anthony Cirelli and Yanni Gourde. Andrei Vasilevskiy stopped 22 shots.

"Our mentality was, we wanted to outscore them tonight instead of build a lead and then shut then down," Lightning coach Jon Cooper said. "Our mentality has to be when we get in these situations is shut teams down, not to add to the lead."

Tampa Bay scored 325 goals in 2018-19, the most by any team in 23 years.

Hedman returned after missing the final four regular-season game with an upper-body injury. The Norris Trophy winner took a helmet to the face during a collision with Washington's Carl Hagelin on March 30.

Killorn stole the puck from Jones at the blue line during a power play for Columbus and put a backhander past Bobrovsky to open the scoring 4:12 into the game. Tampa Bay was tied for third in short-handed goals during the regular season with 12.

After Cirelli had a rebound goal at 11:01, Gourde's waist-high deflection of Mikhail Sergachev's shot made it 3-0 with 2:10 left in the first.

"We're just losing too many battles," Blue Jackets coach John Tortorella said of his first-intermission message. "Just the grind of the game. We have to be able to grind with them."

Foligno cut the deficit to 3-1 at 9:15 of the second on a breakaway goal after Tampa Bay's Ryan McDonagh made an errant pass in the offensive zone.

Alexandre Texier, Columbus' 19-year-old rookie who played in the Blue Jackets' final two regular-season games, skated in alone on Vasilevskiy but missed the net on a shot with 4 minutes to go in the first.

Bobrovsky stopped four shots over the final 40 seconds of the second, including a nifty glove save on Steven Stamkos.

"We don't have a chance if he doesn't play the way he played through the second and the third," Tortorella said of Bobrovsky.

Nikita Kucherov, who had an NHL-best 128 points in the regular season, was held without a point but had an in-close chance turned aside by Bobrovsky and hit the crossbar during the opening minute of the second during a power play.

"I don't know if it's a wake-up call, but we know it's a tough league to win in and we want to be better when we're up 3-0," Hedman said.

NOTES: Tampa Bay outscored Columbus 17-3 in sweeping all three games between the teams in the regular season. ... Lightning D Anton Stralman sat out with a lower-body injury, but might return during the series. ... RW Ryan Callahan and D Braydon Coburn were among Tampa Bay's healthy scratches. ... Columbus D Adam McQuaid (upper-body injury) didn't play.

QUOTABLE

"You can go through all the numbers, all the things, them against us, but when you play a 60-minute hockey game and you go through the momentum swings and the surges and maybe the big plays out of someone unexpected or a lousy play from someone unexpected, that changes games. So, that's why it's always up for grabs." — Tortorella before the game on the unpredictability of playoff hockey.

UP NEXT

The Lightning will host Game 2 on Friday night.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

DETROIT — Steve Yzerman is getting another chance to return the Detroit Red Wings to glory.

The Hockey Hall of Famer did it as one the game's great leaders, helping Detroit end a 42-year championship drought with the first of three Stanley Cup celebrations of his playing tenure in Detroit.

Now, he has a shot to do it as general manager.

The Captain is coming home, a move that fired up a fan base and drew emotional responses from ownership. Perhaps in vain, Yzerman tried to pump the brakes on all the excitement.

"This is going to take time," Yzerman said repeatedly Friday as he made a plea for patience.

Yzerman provides hope and a jolt of energy for a franchise that desperately needs both after going three straight years without a playoff appearance. His return means Ken Holland's run as GM is over after 22 years, but he isn't going far: He starts his new job as senior vice president with a multiyear contract, replacing his GM deal that had only one season remaining.

Chris Ilitch, the president and chief executive of Ilitch Holdings, which owns the Red Wings, said Holland encouraged him to hire Yzerman to replace him after the Tampa Bay Lightning gave the Red Wings permission to talk to him about the job in March.

"He said, 'Steve should be the next general manager of the Red Wings,'" Ilitch recalled.

Marian Ilitch, the founder of Ilitch Holdings, appeared to get choked up during Yzerman's news conference and couldn't stop smiling afterward as she celebrated the return of a man she refers to as one of her boys.

"I did have a feeling that someday we would be together again," she said.

Detroit drafted Yzerman No. 4 overall in 1983 and he helped turn around the franchise. His No. 19 jersey hangs in the rafters alongside those of Gordie Howe and other greats along with the franchise's 11 Stanley Cup banners. He retired in 2006 and left four years later to lead the Lightning.

And now the man adored by fans and affectionately known in the Motor City as The Captain is back.

Yzerman is taking the reins of a team that is enduring its worst stretch since the early 1980s when the team was known locally as the "Dead Wings" and needed to give away a car at each home game to get people to attend games.

"There's a lot of work to be done," Yzerman said. "We've been through this before."

The Red Wings have been rebuilding under Holland, who has created salary cap space, stockpiled draft picks and developed a core of young promising young players such as 22-year-old center Dylan Larkin. Yzerman said he will retain coach Jeff Blashill, who was signed to a two-year contract extension toward the end of the regular season.

"Kenny Holland has done a real good job setting up so when the general manager came in, he's ready to go contract-wise, draft-pick wise," said Toronto Maple Leafs coach Mike Babcock, who coached Yzerman in his final NHL season and worked with him when he led the Red Wings to the 2008 Stanley Cup and Canada to Olympic gold in 2010 and 2014. "He's set up and ready to go. They're good friends, they'll work well together."

Yzerman went into management immediately after retiring and Holland was his mentor in the front office. He began his post-playing career as vice president of hockey operations under Holland in Detroit and was part of the organization during that '08 championship.

 Yzerman stepped down as general manager in Tampa Bay last year just two days before training camp, triggering talk he would come back to run the Red Wings. Yzerman's contract with the Lightning expired when they were eliminated in the first round of the NHL playoffs earlier this week. He built Tampa Bay into a perennial contender in eight seasons as general manager, making three trips to the conference final and an advancing to the 2015 Stanley Cup Final where the Lightning lost to Chicago.

"It's a real exciting day for me to see Steve Yzerman back where he belongs," Holland said.

Yzerman spent his entire playing career with the Red Wings. He developed into a two-way center under Hall of Fame coach Scotty Bowman after breaking into the league as a skinny, 18-year-old kid from Cranbrook, British Columbia, who was talented enough to score 39 goals and have 87 points as a rookie.

His body broke down over time and his 22-season career ended with his retirement in 2006 after leading the Red Wings to titles in 1997, 1998 and 2002. His career ended with 1,755 regular-season points, a total that led all active players when he retired and trailed just five in NHL history.

"I knew he would want to get back home," Bowman told The Associated Press. "It has been nine years. It's time. Home is home."

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

LAS VEGAS — After losing in the Stanley Cup Final last June, the Vegas Golden Knights looked to bolster their forward depth by trading for Max Pacioretty and signing Paul Stastny before the season. At the trade deadline, they dealt for Mark Stone.

Those moves that formed one of the most productive lines in hockey paid dividends Sunday night.

Stone had three goals and two assists, and the Golden Knights beat the San Jose Sharks 6-3 to take a 2-1 lead in their first-round playoff series.

It was Stone's first career hat trick.

Stastny had two goals and three assists, and Pacioretty had a goal and an assist as Vegas captured another high-scoring matchup with San Jose. Defenseman Shea Theodore had three assists and Marc-Andre Fleury made 25 saves.

"We know we have more to give and we want to contribute for our team," said Stone, who leads the league with six goals in the playoffs. "Obviously, we're adding matchup problems for other teams and we just want to continue to play our game and not stray away from it. As a whole, we're trying to make sure we're playing consistent."

Stastny, who leads the league with six assists in the postseason, is tied with Stone for the league lead with eight points. Pacioretty sits third with six points.

"I think we're creating a lot of chances off turnovers, and that's the key to our success," Stastny said. "We're not the fastest line, but we have good sticks, we have good anticipation, we know how to read each other."

The Golden Knights and Sharks scored 15 times while splitting the first two games in San Jose. Game 4 of the best-of-seven series is Tuesday night in Las Vegas.

Kevin Labanc, Logan Couture and Tim Meier scored for San Jose, and Martin Jones stopped 34 shots.

After getting outplayed in Game 1, the defending Western Conference champs have used their physicality to dominate the last two games, outhitting the Sharks 46-31 in Game 2 and 56-42 in Game 3.

The Golden Knights also used fast starts to set the tone, scoring a goal inside the first 36 seconds of each of the three periods.

Vegas got off to a fast start when Nate Schmidt went blue line to blue line with a perfect feed through traffic to Stone, who beat Jones with a backhand just 16 seconds into the game. Pacioretty's wrist shot from the top of the right circle at 12:16 extended Vegas' lead to 2-0.

Stastny accounted for both of Vegas' goals in the second as the Knights opened a 4-1 lead, including one just 21 seconds into the period, when he grabbed a rebound between the circles and drove a wrist shot past Jones. Later, he got into a perfect position to redirect a feed from Stone into the net at 16:04.

Stone scored just 36 seconds into the third, when he buried a rebound into a wide-open net, pushing Vegas' lead to 5-1.

"We found a way to get a couple goals early, and we carried the momentum a lot," Vegas coach Gerard Gallant said. "It was a physical game, we played real disciplined and that's what my main concern is, we didn't take a whole lot of penalties tonight and I thought we played a great game."

San Jose quieted the crowd and put Vegas on its heels when it rallied in the third with a pair of goals to get within two.

Couture got his second of the series when his pass intended for Joe Pavelski was tipped in by Vegas defenseman Brayden McNabb. Then, Meier knocked in a rebound after Gustav Nyquist's shot was stopped, making it 5-3 with a little more than 14 minutes remaining.

"I don't think we had enough participants playing at a high enough level. ... The one thing about our group is they don't quit," San Jose coach Peter DeBoer said. "They haven't, regardless of the scoreboard. That's something we can hang our hat on. (But) we didn't do enough to win tonight."

Stone got his third goal when took a pass from Pacioretty, skated in alone and went forehand-backhand to beat Jones with a little more than six minutes to play.

NOTES: The Golden Knights signed forward Nikita Gusev to a one-year, entry-level contract and expect the Moscow native to join the team for practice on Monday. Gusev, 26, had a Kontinental Hockey League-high 82 points in 62 regular-season games. During the KHL playoffs, he recorded 19 points, which ranked second in the league. ... The Golden Knights are the 13th team in NHL history, and third in the last 30 years, to score in the opening minute of back-to-back playoff games. ... Vegas is the first franchise in NHL history to hold a lead in each of its first five all-time playoff series. ... San Jose LW Michael Haley left in the second period after injuring his left ankle on a blocked shot and did not return.

UP NEXT

Game 4 is Tuesday night in Las Vegas.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

PITTSBURGH — The New York Islanders don't play a particularly sexy brandy of hockey. They forecheck. They backcheck. They block shots and take few risks, more focused on fundamentals than flash.

It's a style designed to frustrate opponents regardless of pedigree, one that has them on the cusp of just their second playoff series win in more than a quarter-century.

Jordan Eberle and Brock Nelson scored 62 seconds apart in the first period to quickly erase a rare deficit, Robin Lehner stopped 25 shots and the Islanders moved within one victory of finishing off Sidney Crosby and the rest of the frustrated Pittsburgh Penguins with a 4-1 win on Sunday to take a 3-0 lead in their best-of-seven Eastern Conference quarterfinal.

It's heady territory for a franchise that's advanced past the first round just once since 1993. Yet the Islanders certainly look like they belong on the big stage. They've outscored Pittsburgh 11-5 through three games and have trailed for less than four minutes through nine-plus periods against a team that began the playoffs looking to capture its third Stanley Cup in four years, a dream that's all but vanished.

"We kind of did our best to play simple hockey and really just grind it out a little bit," said New York forward Anders Lee, whose empty-net goal with 1:28 to go pushed the Islanders to the cusp of an unlikely sweep.

It's what the Islanders do.

While they lack Pittsburgh's offensive firepower, they've made up for it with depth and resiliency. Rather than get rattled after Garrett Wilson gave the Penguins just their second lead of the series when he redirected a point shot by Lehner just past the midway point of the first period, the Islanders responded immediately.

Eberle beat Matt Murray short side from just above the goal line 28 seconds after Wilson's score to tie the game and Nelson finished off a 2-on-1 to put New York in front to stay just over a minute later. Lehner withstood a series of pushes by the Penguins, and the Islanders counterpunched brilliantly in the third period behind goals from Leo Komarov and Lee to pull away.

"Playoffs are all about momentum," said Eberle, who has three goals in three games. "When you can take some team's momentum away and just continue to build yours, it's key."

Matt Murray finished with 32 saves for the Penguins, but Pittsburgh again struggled to generate any sort of sustained offensive pressure.

New York, which allowed an NHL-low 196 goals on its way to a second-place finish in the Metropolitan Division, has clamped down on Crosby and linemate Jake Guentzel. The two — who combined for 75 goals and 101 assists during the regular season — have yet to record a point in the playoffs.

Pittsburgh needs a win in Game 4 on Tuesday to avoid being swept for the first time since the 2013 Eastern Conference finals against Boston.

"You've got to find ways to score goals this time of year," Crosby said. "It's not easy but you've got to find a way to do it and obviously we haven't done a good job of it through the first three games."

The Islanders controlled Games 1 and 2 back home on Long Island to take the franchise's first 2-0 postseason lead since the 1983 Stanley Cup finals, when they completed their run of four straight championships by sweeping Wayne Gretzky and the Edmonton Oilers.

The Penguins insisted it wasn't time to panic, with coach Mike Sullivan downplaying the idea his team needed to play with desperation. Still, he opted to tinker with his lines in search of a spark, elevating Dominik Simon to the top line alongside Crosby and Guentzel and putting Jared McCann — who sat out Game 2 with a lower-body injury — on the second line with Evgeni Malkin and Phil Kessel.

It didn't quite work. Simon had a chance to even the score late in the first period, but Guenztel's crossing pass at the end of a 3-on-1 headed to Simon's stick instead of his skate, emblematic of a series in which few bounces have gone Pittsburgh's way. Not that the Penguins were looking for sympathy.

"If we work hard and do the right things, we'll earn our bounces," Crosby said.

The Islanders have certainly earned theirs.

Now they find themselves in a spot that seemed improbable at best a week ago: heading to Game 4 with a chance to make Pittsburgh's playoff stay the shortest of the Crosby/Malkin era. They're also aware the next victory will be the hardest to come by.

"This group is not afraid of work," said first-year Islanders coach Barry Trotz, who led Washington past Pittsburgh last spring on the way to the Stanley Cup. "They're not afraid of competition. They're not afraid of a whole lot."

NOTES: Four teams have rallied from 3-0 deficits to win a best-of-seven series, including a victory by the Islanders over the Penguins in 1975. ... Pittsburgh went 0 for 3 on the power play to drop to 1 for 8 with the man advantage in the series. The Islanders went 0 for 2 on the power play, squandering a 30-second two-man advantage in the second period. ... Penguins F Jared McCann skated 14:23 after missing Game 2 with a lower-body injury.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

RALEIGH, N.C. — The last time Justin Williams played in a postseason game in Raleigh, he skated off with the Stanley Cup.

The stakes aren't quite that high — yet — for the Carolina Hurricanes, but the third game of their best-of-seven series with the Washington Capitals on Monday night does bring his career full circle.

Now, "Mr. Game 7" is ready for Game 3 — the first playoff game at PNC Arena in 10 years — and hoping to keep the Hurricanes from falling into a three-games-to-none hole.

"The anticipation of it is what's getting people really excited, because a lot of people don't really know what it is," Williams said. "Everyone's telling them how great (playoff hockey in Raleigh) is and how fun it is, and it is, but really it's something you've got to experience for yourself. It being a while now, you can kind of sometimes forget and fall into that trap that we've talked about of normalcy. But it's everything it's cracked up to be."

Williams had a lot to do with creating the reputation that had gone dormant during that decade-long drought. As a 24-year-old in 2006, he helped the Hurricanes win the Stanley Cup, and his empty-net goal in Game 7 stands as one of the enduring images in club history. He had been traded to Los Angeles when Carolina made its only postseason appearance since, in 2009.

In the second year of his return, he wants to make more memories during a series he called the "perfect storm" because of his strong ties to both franchises.

He spent just two seasons in Washington from 2015-17, and lost in the second round both years, but Capitals players and executives credit him for helping to lay the foundation of the team that last year won the Cup for the first time.

"He spoke when he needed to. But mostly it was his play," Capitals winger T.J. Oshie said. "Any time the game, the pressure rose or the game got more intense, Justin — or 'Stick,' as we call him — he always seemed to be able to rise to the occasion. And he always seemed to elevate his play to match that pressure. And that's something we all tried to emulate, you know. Last year some guys did a great job of doing that. But it is something special and something not every guy can do. And he's one of those guys who can do it."

Carolina brought him back last season on a two-year deal, and then selected him as captain this season.

"I don't think leadership skills ... can be taught. You just be yourself," Williams said. "Fortunately, I've been around a lot of great leaders, so I've taken little bits and pieces of what I like about them and kind of make it my own. One of the more important things is, you can't fake being a leader. You can't manufacture being a leader. You just are. And you've got to try and do what you can. You can't be bashful about it. You believe in yourself, or you don't."

His teammates say that role suits him, and he's instilled a level of accountability that perhaps wasn't always present during a drought that ranked as one of the longest in NHL history.

He also backed up his occasionally harsh words on the ice, ranking second on the team with 23 goals and third with 53 points while helping Carolina close the regular season by going 31-12-2 in its final 45 regular-season games to climb from last place in the division to a wild-card playoff berth.

Yet he also kept things light, masterminding the "Storm Surge" postgame celebrations that took the league by storm.

"Just how vocal he is, how he demands a lot out of everybody ... he is not afraid to hurt anybody's feelings," forward Jordan Martinook said. "I think he's figured out a very, very good way, and he's a very good motivator. Very good guy to follow because he's done it so many times, and to see his success in the playoffs and even our ... stretch to the end of the year. You see the goals he scores, they're big goals. It's an easy guy to jump on his back."

Williams has thrived throughout his career in Game 7s, owning the NHL record with 14 points in those games and scoring seven goals to tie the mark held by 15-year veteran Glenn Anderson. His teams are 7-1 in those games — hence, the "Mr. Game 7" nickname.

The Hurricanes have a lot to do to force this one-sided series to a seventh game, but if it should get to that point, they'll be glad they have Williams, just as the Capitals were during their two years with him.

"He has the right blend of leadership, have fun, compete," Capitals GM Brian MacLellan said. "He really senses the tone of an organization, of a team, where they are at in the games and playoffs and he provides — and he did provide us with that leadership, and he is doing the same thing at Carolina now, so he's just a great guy to have on your team."

___

AP Hockey Writer Stephen Whyno in Washington contributed to this report.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

WASHINGTON — A rat falling out of the arena hallway ceiling during the Carolina Hurricanes' warmup game of soccer was just a precursor to a wacky afternoon of playoff hockey.

Long after the dead rodent was removed, Game 2 between the Hurricanes and Washington Capitals included a questionable ejection for a check to the head, a shot off one goalie's mask and another that went in off the other goalie's backside. It fittingly ended with an overtime goal from an unlikely source that sent the defending Stanley Cup champions into a wild celebration around the team's most popular player.

Veteran leader Brooks Orpik scored 1:48 into overtime Saturday to give Washington a 4-3 victory and a 2-0 lead over Carolina in the first-round series. His fourth goal in his 151st playoff game was his third winner, and Orpik became just the 11th defenseman in NHL history with two postseason overtime goals.

"I'm probably not counted on for too many goals, but I think if you want to have the long runs, you need everybody kind of chipping in and doing things they don't normally do," Orpik said. "Always feels good when the team comes out on top."

The Capitals came out on top thanks to Alex Ovechkin's two perfect passes, a 5-on-3 penalty kill and a stick shortage by Carolina that allowed Evgeny Kuznetsov to find Orpik for his goal. Afterward, owner Ted Leonsis quipped, "Just like it was drawn up."

There was no way to script the strange happenings that unfolded on and off the ice. Perhaps it was an omen for things to come when the ball used in the Hurricanes' pregame soccer ritual knocked a rat down from the ceiling.

"I saw that," Carolina's Sebastian Aho said. "First time I've seen it. Kind of odd."

Then the game happened. Just like Game 1, the Capitals jumped out to an early 2-0 lead — this time on goals by Nicklas Backstrom and T.J. Oshie — but this time the Hurricanes didn't wait until the third period to come back.

Lucas Wallmark scored late in the first after teammate Saku Maenalanen brushed Braden Holtby, which Capitals coach Todd Reirden challenged for goaltender interference. It held up because the NHL situation room and referees determined the contact wasn't significant enough to disallow the goal.

"Playing the position, you know that that's interference," said Holtby, who made 25 saves. "But there's a point in hockey where you've just got to battle, too. I'm not going to complain about a call or no-call. I know that doing that is giving me the best chance to stop that puck. We move on."

Things only got stranger in the second period. Less than a minute after exiting the penalty box, Hurricanes forward Micheal Ferland hit Nic Dowd while bent over and was given a five-minute match penalty for an illegal check to the head and ejected.

After officials conferred and decided to make it a five-minute major, coach Rod Brind'Amour screamed at referee Steve Kozari that it was a clean hit, pointing to his hip to emphasize Ferland made mostly hip to shoulder contact. Dowd left to go through concussion protocol but returned.

"To be honest with you, I let up," said Ferland, who added he doesn't expect to be suspended. "I could have finished with my shoulder, but I didn't. I came, hit him with my butt. I thought it was a clean hit. I don't agree with the call."

During the ensuing power play, a one-timer from defenseman John Carlson hit Hurricanes goaltender Petr Mrazek on the right side of his mask and knocked it off. Mrazek winced in pain but did not get pulled for concussion protocol and stayed in the game.

"It caught me a little bit on the chin there," said Mrazek, who made 29 saves. "When I fell, I didn't have the mask on and I hit the ice pretty hard with my face. That was the worst."

The worst moment for Holtby came when Aho ended a 15-game goal drought by banking the puck off him from a bad angle. Wilson and Jordan Staal traded third-period goals, and Mrazek stopped Carlson in the final seconds of regulation.

That only set the stage for Orpik's heroics. After Hurricanes defenseman Brett Pesce lost his stick and got one from forward Teuvo Teravainen, the Capitals had the opening they needed to take a 2-0 series lead and players mobbed Orpik to celebrate the father figure's clutch goal.

"There's really no better guy to score an OT winner," Wilson said. "We were pumped up, and he deserves it. Huge goal for us."

NOTES: Ten of the Capitals' last 14 first-round games went to overtime. ... With his 101st playoff point, Backstrom moved ahead of Daniel Alfredsson into sole possession of fourth place among Swedish players. ... Hurricanes D Calvin de Haan missed his fifth game in a row with an upper-body injury. ... Maenalanen replaced Greg McKegg in Carolina's lineup. ... Capitals C Lars Eller played after missing practice Friday for upper-body maintenance.

UP NEXT

Game 3 Monday night in Raleigh is the Hurricanes' first home playoff game since May 26, 2009.

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Dave Kaplan

The tattoo etched across the left side of Stephane Matteau’s torso reminds him of a signature life goal.

It does not depict his immortal moment 25 years ago this May. There is no image of the Stanley Cup, which he raised two weeks later at Madison Square Garden to celebrate the Rangers’ first championship in 54 years.

As the Rangers’ eternal playoff hero lifts his shirt, he reveals the inked-in words he aspires to: “Believe in yourself. You are braver than you think, more talented than you know, and capable of more than you imagine.”

Matteau is wiser and sober at 49. He has battled struggles familiar to the hockey culture he grew up in: mental scars, fear, alcoholism. All of which almost cost him his life.

He had lived every Canadian child’s dream, reaching the N.H.L., playing 13 seasons and being a playoff hero. On May 27, 1994, in the second overtime of Game 7 of the Eastern Conference finals against the Devils, Matteau scored perhaps the most significant goal in Rangers history. His name — and Howie Rose’s “Matteau, Matteau, Matteau!” radio call — have a permanent place in New York sports history.

Whenever Matteau returns to the city — as he will Friday, when the Rangers host a reunion of the 1994 Stanley Cup champions — he knows he is part of a venerated alumni group. He still receives effusive gratitude from Rangers fans. Yet his famous goal, which he still calls lucky, does not erase lingering feelings of doubt and career dissatisfaction.

Depression marred his childhood, his hockey career and his retirement. He gave up drinking 17 years ago, but his anxieties and mental struggles were becoming too much to bear. About seven years ago, Matteau realized he was heading toward “a dark and dangerous place” and finally sought counseling.

“I’m humbled, very privileged, I was the chosen one,” he said of his playoff heroics. “I feel blessed to have a lot of good people around me, during good times, and especially the bad ones.”

Matteau was an inconsistent 24-year-old left wing when the Cup-starved Rangers acquired him and Brian Noonan from Chicago at the March 1994 trade deadline, because of the persistence of Coach Mike Keenan.

“Mike was banging on me all season about getting Matteau,” recalled Neil Smith, the general manager at the time, who gave up Tony Amonte, a 33-goal scorer the previous season. “He went to the finals with him in Chicago in ’92. Although we had the best record in the league, Mike felt adamant we’d need size and depth in the playoffs, even if we had to give up our future.”

Matteau was a revelation in the playoffs. He scored six goals, including a double-overtime goal in Game 3 against the Devils, and repeated the feat in Game 7, making him an instant celebrity.

Yet his tenure in New York lasted only a year and a half. He was so unproductive for the Rangers after they won the Cup that Smith traded Matteau to St. Louis. There he was reunited with Keenan, who acquired Matteau four times during his N.H.L. coaching stints.

Keenan said he appreciated the team skills that Matteau brought. “He was a versatile player, a big, strong skater who was the type of player you need in the playoffs,” Keenan said. “We needed him in New York to win the Cup, particularly against New Jersey, with how big they were.

“I pushed him hard, like everyone. I saw he had some self-doubt, but I never once had any doubt about him.”

Matteau could not sustain the confidence his former coach had in him.

“I was known as a playoff player,” said Matteau, who never scored more than 19 goals a season during his career. “And then I go the next seven years without one goal in the playoffs. Why is that?”

He played in Calgary, Chicago, New York, St. Louis, San Jose and Florida. Much of the baggage Matteau carried to those places was psychological.

His doubt stretched back to a tormented childhood in northwestern Quebec. He grew up in Rouyn (now Rouyn-Noranda), a small middle-class town about 380 miles from Montreal. It has produced 27 N.H.L. players, including stars like Pierre Turgeon and his brother Sylvain, Dave Keon, Réjean Houle and Eric Desjardins.

One of Matteau’s closest friends was Pierre Turgeon. They were born five days apart and were teammates on youth baseball and hockey teams. Turgeon, who went on to score more than 500 goals in a 19-year N.H.L. career, said Matteau was always “selling himself a little short,” despite his prowess as a multisport athlete.

“Even as a pro, Steph used to worry,” Turgeon said. “I remember when he got traded to St. Louis, he was put on a line with me and Brett Hull, which was great. But he says to me, ‘What if I get 20 goals? Everyone will always expect me to do it again.’”

A gangly boy with a bad complexion, Matteau said, he was a frequent target of bullies.

Worse, though, was his father’s relentless criticism. “Whatever I did, it wasn’t good enough,” Matteau said.

Turgeon noticed that Matteau’s father, a mechanic in a car dealership, was “very hard on him.”

“But,” he added, “I don’t think anybody knew what was going on with Steph inside.”

As 12-year-olds, Turgeon and Matteau were the standouts on the Canadian baseball team that went to the 1982 Little League World Series. But Matteau’s self-esteem worsened. Around the time he was 15, Matteau seriously considered suicide. That he did not go through with it made him feel even more cowardly.

“If I could’ve spent my entire youth curled up under a rug,” Matteau said, “I would have.”

He has found new purpose in his sobriety: talking to young people about overcoming despair, relating to their fears and vulnerabilities as authentically as he can.

Almost two years ago, Matteau helped create a leadership program for Bronx elementary and middle school students in partnership with Woodlawn Cemetery. He has visited about 50 schools.

“I struggled with a lot of things the kids go through, being bullied, feeling hopeless,” Matteau said. “I want them to know they can change their own lives.”

Matteau, who lives in Montreal, has also been mentoring at-risk teens at River Rock Academy, an alternative school, in Lancaster, Pa. His wife of 24 years, Nathalie, frequently participates in the Lancaster programs, a reaffirmation of her belief in her husband, who seldom believed in himself.

“What that woman has endured with me,” he said, “it’s a miracle she refused to lose hope.”

Both his children play hockey. His son, Stefan, 25, is a former first-round draft pick of the Devils who now plays for the Vegas Golden Knights’ top affiliate, and his daughter, Alyson, 21, is a senior on the University of Maine women’s hockey team.

Several years ago, Matteau coached a Quebec junior team that his son played on, and things frequently grew tense.

“I was hard on Stef,” Matteau said. “I didn’t want him to make the same mistakes as me.”

His wife interceded, reminding Matteau of the pressure his own father put on him.

On a blustery January day, Matteau visited P.S. 69 in the South Bronx for a session with 20 fifth graders. He is a big man at 6 feet 4 inches and a only few pounds over his playing weight, 220. With casual humor, he easily connected with a multicultural group of children in his French Canadian accent.

Matteau talked to the students about their positive traits, about their relationships with peers and family. The conversations are designed to empower them to be kinder and more empathetic toward one another.

His two-hour program opened with a video of him scoring his famous Game 7 goal against the Devils.

“I’ve watched this video 10,000 times, and I still get goose bumps,” Matteau told the students. “That was a great, exciting moment for me. But my legacy is more than just scoring one of the most important goals in Rangers history.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

It wasn't long after celebrating Craig Smith's overtime goal that P.K. Subban zeroed in on the cold reality of Nashville's playoff series against Dallas.

"There are no easy shifts out there, no easy games and no easy plays," he said. "It's hand-to-hand combat out there."

Subban and the Central Division-winning Predators needed to work overtime just to even things with the Stars at a game apiece, and the Colorado Avalanche got a sudden-death goal from Nathan MacKinnon to tie up their series against the Western Conference top-seeded Calgary Flames. In the East, the defending Stanley Cup champion Washington Capitals needed extra time to take a two games to none lead on the Carolina Hurricanes, and the Boston Bruins are going blow-for-blow with the Toronto Maple Leafs in series that's all square and looking like it could be a classic.

"It's nerve-racking, but it's definitely fun," Avalanche coach Jared Bednar said.

None of these first-round series are going to be easy — even for the Capitals, who will go into a madhouse Monday (7 p.m. EDT, CNBC) for the first Hurricanes home playoff game in a decade.

"Absolutely no quit in that team," Washington coach Todd Reirden said Sunday about Carolina. "They're not going away."

This isn't a time of year for shrinking from challenges, and the Bruins showed in their Game 2 against the Maple Leafs that they're not going anywhere. As the series shifts to Toronto, the Maple Leafs will be without center Nazem Kadri for at least Game 3 (7 p.m. EDT, NBCSN), who has an in-person hearing with the NHL's department of player safety earlier in the day for cross-checking Jake DeBrusk in the face.

Kadri was suspended three playoff games for boarding Boston's Tommy Wingels when these teams met in the first round a year ago and could be banned for the rest of this series, if not longer. It's no surprise the tensions are high between the Bruins and Maple Leafs.

"Things were getting pretty amped up there towards the end of the game and a lot of emotions, and that's what playoff hockey is all about," Bruins agitator extraordinaire Brad Marchand said after Game 2. "It's going to happen on both sides. There's going to be a lot of physicality the rest of the series."

The Capitals will try to keep up the physicality against the small and quick Hurricanes, who have shown they can come back on Washington. Center Jordan Staal said, "We're right there," and there's no shortage of belief that they can make it a series.

"I don't think we played our best game," center Sebastian Aho said. "It's just trying to believe that when we play our best, we have a better chance to win."

Stars-Predators is anyone's series going into Game 3 Monday night in Dallas (9:30 p.m. EDT, NBCSN). Each of the first two games was decided by a goal, and players expect the low-scoring trend to continue as the series wears on.

"It's not obviously open like the regular season," Stars goaltender Ben Bishop said. "Everybody finishes checks, everybody's going 110 percent. It's not going to be that up-and-down style that you're used to."

Bishop clearly isn't watching Avalanche-Flames, which finally opened up in Game 2 after a shutout by Calgary's Mike Smith in the series opener. Led by MacKinnon, captain Gabriel Landeskog and now-healthy Mikko Rantanen, Colorado looks like it can push the Flames with the series shifting to Denver for Game 3 (10 p.m. EDT, CNBC).

"We've always had the confidence in this room," forward Matt Nieto said. "Down late or running into a hot goalie, we know we can win games against this team. We're thrilled to be going back 1-1 and get back in front of that Pepsi Center crowd and try to get a lead in the series."

The Capitals know from their own experience in the first round last year that a 2-0 series lead doesn't mean a whole lot. They came back from down 2-0 to beat Columbus on the way to winning the Cup and were pushed to seven games by Tampa Bay after leading the Eastern Conference final by that same margin.

They know better by now than to underestimate the Hurricanes.

"There's a lot of desperation whether you're down two or you're starting the series, but there might be a little extra," Washington winger T.J. Oshie said. "feels good to be up 2-nothing, but I think we can still do a lot better job and we're going to have to if we want to go get a win there."

LATE ADDITIONS

The Avalanche could have top prospect Cale Makar in their lineup sooner than later after signing the 20-year-old defenseman to a three-year, entry-level contract Sunday. Makar, who won the Hobey Baker Award as the NCAA player of the year, is fresh off a loss with UMass in the Frozen Four title game Saturday and could be a big boost for Colorado.

"It's my job to make sure I'm putting him in a position to succeed," Bednar said. "I think he's an elite talent and a real special player. So I have hopes he can come in and help us in this series."

Colorado isn't the only team adding a player with the playoffs underway. The Blue Jackets signed defenseman Vladislav Gavrikov to a two-year deal and the Vegas Golden Knights signed forward Nikita Gusev for the rest of the postseason after their seasons in Russia's Kontinental Hockey League ended.

"Vladislav is an outstanding defenseman who excels at both ends of the ice," Columbus GM Jarmo Kekalainen said. "He is big, strong and mobile and has enjoyed a successful career in the KHL and in international competition, including winning an Olympic gold medal last year. We are very excited about his future with the Columbus Blue Jackets."

___

AP Sports Writers Teresa M. Walker in Nashville, Pat Graham in Denver, Joedy McCreary in Raleigh and Jimmy Golen in Boston and The Canadian Press contributed to this report.

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

COLUMBUS, Ohio — The Tampa Bay Lightning, the NHL's best team, lost their first two playoff games at home to the Columbus Blue Jackets and are vulnerable without their top scorer for Game 3.

Winnipeg lost its first two at home, leaving the Jets fighting for their postseason relevance as that series shifts to St. Louis.

The Pittsburgh Penguins are loaded with stars who have years of playoff experience. The Pens are down 2-0 to the New York Islanders as their series moves to the Steel City.

So much for home-ice advantage and conventional thinking in these NHL playoffs.

The Blue Jackets have been in this heady position before in the postseason, just before they fell on their faces.

Now they have the Tampa Bay on the ropes and are enticingly closer to winning the first playoff series in franchise history. The series shifts to Columbus on Sunday night (7 p.m., NBCSN). The Lightning will be without 128-point scorer Nikita Kucherov , who was suspended for a game for boarding the Markus Nutivaara on Friday night.

Last year the Blue Jackets went up 2-0 in the first round against Washington on the road before the Capitals won four straight and rolled on a Stanley Cup championship. In other words, there's a lot of hockey left to the play in the series, and the Blue Jackets players know it all too well.

"I think we should still have a sour taste in our mouth from last year," said wing Cam Atkinson, who scored the first goal for Columbus in the 5-1 rout of Tampa Bay on Friday . "It's a series for a reason. They're obviously the best team in the league. We just can't take our foot off the gas pedal."

Columbus has risen to the occasion and hasn't backed down from their opponents.

"We're in a hole, we're in a tough position, but we are not going to quit," Lightning center Steven Stamkos said. "We have to take a page out of their book and go on the road and win a hockey game. We just have to focus on Game 3. It's tough, it just hasn't gone our way right now."

Or, as coach Jon Cooper put it: "This is a five-alarm fire."

Islanders at Penguins, New York leads series 2-0 (noon EDT, NBC).

During their current run of 13 consecutive playoff appearances, the Pittsburgh Penguins lost in the first round three times. They'll need to turn things around quickly to avoid a fourth.

Pittsburgh took its first lead in the series in the second period of Game 2 before the Islanders tied it minutes later and then pulled away in the third period for a 3-1 win.

The Penguins will look to regroup as they head home for the next two games. They know it's not an insurmountable deficit.

"It's the first team to win four games, not two," coach Mike Sullivan said when asked about his message to the team after Game 2. "We got to go back home, we got to control what we can. We got to win one game, and then we'll go from there."

The Islanders have held Jake Guentzel, who led the Penguins with 40 goals during the season, and star center Sidney Crosby (35 goals, 65 assists) off the scoresheet in the first two games.

Pittsburgh, sixth in the NHL in scoring during the season, has scored four times on 76 shots against an Islanders team that allowed the fewest goals in the league. After finishing fifth on the power play at 24.6 percent, the Penguins are 1 for 5 so far.

Jets at Blues, St. Louis leads series 2-0 (7:30 p.m. EDT, CNBC)

The Jets' confidence is not shaken after losing each of the first two games of the series by one goal.

"For the most part, we've played two pretty solid games," Winnipeg center Adam Lowry said after the Jets fell 4-3 on Friday night . "It comes down to a couple breaks. I feel like we're right there. I don't think we're frustrated. I don't think you can let that creep into this room."

Oskar Sundqvist scored twice, and Ryan O'Reilly broke the tie early in the third period to give the Blues the edge as the series shifts to St. Louis.

"They are going to give us their best game, Game 3 at home," Blues coach Craig Berube said. "And there's no reason to get too high. You've got to stay ready and you gotta play even better than we've played."

Jordan Binnington made 26 saves for St. Louis, becoming the second goalie in franchise history to win his first two playoff games.

Sharks at Golden Knights, series tied 1-1 (10 p.m. EDT, NBCSN)

Taking penalties against San Jose usually isn't the right recipe for success, especially with the Sharks' two potent power-play units led by dynamic defensemen Brent Burns and Erik Karlsson and a talented group of forwards.

 Vegas survived that in Game 2 and even came out ahead when the Sharks had the man advantage. The Golden Knights committed eight minor penalties that gave San Jose power plays, including one minute of five-on-three action in Game 2.

But Vegas got the better of the play in those situations, scoring two short-handed goals and allowing just one on the power play, which proved to be pivotal.

"It's hard to win this time of year if you don't win special teams," Sharks coach Peter DeBoer said.

San Jose is just 2 for 13 on the power play this series, with two goals allowed, a far cry from a unit that ranked sixth in the league in the regular season at 23.7%.

"I just didn't think we shot the puck enough — myself included," forward Logan Couture said. "Too many times, we'd pass. We've got to get back to shooting it."

___

Associated Press Sports writers Josh Dubow in San Jose, California; Vinay Cherwoo in New York; and Mark Didtler in Tampa, Florida, contributed to this report.

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

WASHINGTON — Valtteri Filppula scored twice in his return from injury, Robin Lehner stopped all 29 shots he faced and the New York Islanders beat the Washington Capitals 3-0 in each team's regular-season finale Saturday night to clinch home-ice advantage in the first round of the playoffs.

Coach Barry Trotz's team came into the game against his former team needing at least one point to secure a second-place finish in the Metropolitan Division, just behind Washington. The Islanders will open the playoffs at home for the first time since 1988 against either Pittsburgh or Carolina.

The Capitals will face either the Penguins or Hurricanes in the first round as they try to repeat as Stanley Cup champions. Washington had nothing left to play for in game 82, so center Nicklas Backstrom, right wing T.J. Oshie and defenseman John Carlson rested and backup goaltender Pheonix Copley started and made 18 saves.

New York faced the possibility of starting on the road at Pittsburgh, making this a meaningful game. First-round games will take place at the renovated Nassau Coliseum, while any subsequent rounds would be at Barclays Center in Brooklyn.

Filppula and Lehner helped set up a raucous atmosphere for Game 1 at the Coliseum by taking care of business against the Capitals.

In his first game back after missing the past eight with a hyperextended left elbow, Filppula scored on a breakaway early in the second period. The Finnish center added his 17th goal of the season in the third on a redirection.

Lehner made a handful of key saves on the penalty kill to pick up his career-high sixth shutout of the season.

A year after being worst in the NHL in goals allowed under previous coach Doug Weight, the Islanders won the William M. Jennings Trophy for the fewest goals allowed.

NOTES: Matt Martin scored an empty-net goal with 2:33 left to seal it. ... Islanders D Johnny Boychuk was back in the lineup after being a healthy scratch Thursday. ... Capitals LW Alex Ovechkin finished with 51 goals, which was two more than Edmonton's Leon Draisaitl for the league lead with the Oilers in action in Calgary later Saturday. ... F Dmitrij Jaskin played his first game since Jan. 17. ... A pregame tribute was held on the one-year anniversary of the Humboldt Broncos junior hockey team's bus crash that killed 16 people and injured 13.

UP NEXT

The Islanders and Capitals are each four playoff wins away from a second-round showdown between Trotz and former associate coach Todd Reirden.

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

Dead-last in the NHL in early January, the St. Louis Blues looked like underachievers who cost their head coach his job and wouldn't remain together for long.

Then the Blues did the improbable, winning 30 of their final 45 games to become the seventh team since the expansion era began in 1967 to go from last in the league after New Year's Day to the playoffs.

But the transformation didn't begin from rock bottom of the standings on the morning of Jan 3. St. Louis' roller-coaster ride started when it missed the playoffs by one point a year ago, rose with offseason additions of Ryan O'Reilly, David Perron, Tyler Bozak and Patrick Maroon and took a steep drop with a November firing of coach Mike Yeo before the steady climb began.

Through a gelling process that took far longer than expected, a transition to interim coach Craig Berube, amid the noise of trade speculation that could've broken up the core and during a 70-day stretch spent almost entirely on the road, the Blues became the Stanley Cup contender they looked like before the season and are now ready to prove it in the playoffs.

"We showed that we get the job done here together," forward Brayden Schenn said. "We have a veteran group, experienced group that I think we can do hopefully some damage in the playoffs."

Playoffs? Until mid-January, the Blues didn't win three straight games.

Looking back, general manager Doug Armstrong didn't bank on how long it would take the team to coalesce with so many new players.

"There was a lot of really good players that were respectful of each other, almost too respectful, and nobody wanted to step on anyone's toes and take charge," Armstrong said. "It was the perfect storm in a positive way that we had an experienced group of players that were embarrassed. Craig simplified his message, which I think for a veteran team is appreciated, and then they responded to the embarrassment I think that they were feeling and we were feeling as an organization."

The embarrassment of a second midseason coaching change in three years and 22 losses in their first 37 games made for a good start. Then reports surfaced that Armstrong was at least listening on trading just about anyone on the roster from five-time 30-goal-scoring winger Vladimir Tarasenko to 25-year-old defenseman Colton Parayko.

Players believe the trade talk lit a fire under them.

"We didn't want to split up," forward Oskar Sundqvist said. "We kind of came together as a group and said we don't want to split up, we want to stay together and we obviously need to play a lot better and start winning some hockey games for that to happen."

The Blues' front office and coaching staff noticed improvement in December, but the positive results didn't start showing until right around the time of goaltender Jordan Binnington's first start Jan. 7. The 25-year-old went 13-1-1 in his first 15 starts and gave St. Louis an unexpected boost.

As Armstrong said, if the Blues knew Binnington would be league-best 1.89 goals-against average and .927 save percentage good, "We would've had him up here a couple years ago."

Touche.

But it wasn't just Binnington. Led by O'Reilly, Parayko and captain Alex Pietrangelo, St. Louis became more structured and better defensively under Berube, who finally saw tangible results of molding this group into a heavy, north-south team.

Because teams rarely dig out of this deep a hole and the Blues' schedule was so road-heavy in the second half, it was still a tough task to think they'd make the playoffs. Then they went over two months from mid-January to mid-March never playing consecutive home games, and instead of falling apart, the Blues bonded away from home and put together a season-saving 11-game winning streak.

"At that time when we went on the road, it was like two months basically on the road, we were in a position where we had to win," Berube said. "These guys did a good job, they came together as a team and played really well over that span and we're in the position we're in because of that."

Games during that streak resonate to different members of the Blues. Veteran defenseman Jay Bouwmeester remembers the victory at Anaheim before the All-Star break that gave the team a much-needed "reset." Armstrong won't soon forget his team's third-period comeback at Florida two games later that kept the good vibrations going into an overtime victory at Tampa Bay and a sweep of a home-and-home series against Nashville.

"We got on a positive roll of winning games and we were playing every other night, so you really start to get into the groove," Armstrong said. "That was a big stretch of games in there where I think the belief was cemented in our minds that I'm not saying we're the best team in the league, but we felt we could compete with the better teams in the league at that point."

Armstrong said he never came close to pulling the trigger on a major trade that would've shaken up the core, in large part because it was too far away from the deadline to make such a move. That's not exactly a ringing endorsement that he didn't want to make a move but rather an acknowledgement that a fellow GM would've likelier thrown him an anchor than a life preserver.

Finally playing up to expectations allowed the Blues to finish third in the Central Division, and they'll face second-place Winnipeg in the first round.

Bouwmeester considers the Blues underdogs going into the playoffs because they started from the bottom. But now they're here and look more than capable of making a long run.

"You look over the season just how well we've been able to rally and find a way and crawl back into it, I'm very confident in our group that we can have success," O'Reilly said. "Throughout the season, we beat some great hockey teams we feel we can beat anyone. Going into it, there's definitely a lot of belief, but at the same time it's a lot of hard work that we're looking forward to doing."

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

TORONTO — With the Maple Leafs buzzing and Scotiabank Arena rocking after Toronto tied it early in second period, the Boston Bruins needed a push from their dormant stars.

David Pastrnak and Brad Marchand delivered.

Pastrnak scored twice in quick succession, Marchand had a goal and two assists and the Bruins held off the Toronto Maple Leafs 6-4 on Wednesday night to tie the first-round series 2-2.

"It's not easy to win in this building," Pastrnak said. "A hell of a win."

Game 5 is Friday night in Boston.

Charlie McAvoy had a goal and an assist for Boston, Zdeno Chara and Joakim Nordstrom also scored and Tuukka Rask made 38 saves.

At 42 years, 30 days, the 6-foot-9 Chara became the second-oldest defenseman in NHL history to score a playoff goal. Chris Chelios holds the record at 45 years, 86 days.

"If I contribute something offensively, it's always a plus," Chara said. "But my focus is always playing well defensively. I take a lot of pride in playing well defensively."

Auston Matthews scored twice for Toronto. Zach Hyman and Travis Dermott also scored and Frederik Andersen stopped 25 shots.

"We had real good energy," Toronto coach Mike Babcock said. "I didn't think we had the kind of brain all that time that we wanted. Turned the puck over, two real big mistakes on the penalty kill. Just got in our own way a little bit."

After the Maple Leafs overcame a 2-0 deficit to tie it early in the second period, Pastrnak put Boston back in front at 3:16 when he redirected a pass from Marchand on a 2-on-1. The Bruins then got a power play when Matthews went off for roughing, and Marchand whipped a backhand pass to a wide-open Pastrnak, who snapped the puck short-side on Andersen for his second goal in 1:35.

Chara made it 5-2 at 5:39 of the third.

"He's a true professional. He's a great leader," Bruins coach Bruce Cassidy said. "Still a really solid hockey player. They're trying to find ways to expose him and he's trying to adapt to the new NHL and has. There's a reason why he's still playing and still effective. Not only is he hard, but he's smart. He's a very intelligent man and has been able to figure out a way to keep playing this game and be effective."

Matthews scored on the power play with 8:08 left, and Dermott made it 5-4 through traffic with 6:33 remaining. Nordstrom scored into an empty net with two seconds to go.

"We did a lot of good things," Toronto center John Tavares said. "We generated a lot of chances, got a lot of pucks to the net. We didn't have our best start tonight, but we gave ourselves a good chance."

NOTES: Boston was 2 for 2 on the power play. Toronto went 1 for 3. ... Canadian hip hop artist Drake and Toronto Raptors coach Nick Nurse attended the game.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

In Toronto, a surplus of amateur hockey teams has led to a thriving marketplace for that most sought-after of necessities: someone willing to play goalie.

By Curtis Rush

TORONTO — Keith Hamilton carried himself like an N.H.L. goaltender even before he made his first save in a pickup game at Moss Park Arena. Standing 6 feet tall — and looking much bigger in skates — he made the net behind him appear to shrink. 

But this was hardly the N.H.L. Hamilton, 39, was guarding the cage against a team of middle-age men from an Ontario public utility. He wore a replica Colorado Avalanche jersey. Every other player was differentiated by tones more than colors, turning the sessions into light versus dark, a hockey version of shirts and skins.

After an hourlong scrimmage, Hamilton cut a lonely figure as he skated off the ice. There were no handshakes, no fist bumps. He collected the cash he was promised — the going rate is about 50 Canadian dollars per game — changed out of his gear and drove off to the next arena. This was his third game of the day. He had two to go. 

Hamilton is a hockey mercenary, one of the estimated 150 to 200 hired guns in Toronto’s recreation leagues who are in demand as much for their position — goaltender — as  for their skills. With 143 indoor publicly owned arenas in the Toronto metropolitan area, there are many more teams than there are available goalies.

Teams can do without one of their skaters. There are plenty of them. But if the goalie can’t make it, a game could be forfeited, which can feel like a puck to the mouth when ice time costs more than 400 dollars an hour.

“It’s not like soccer, where a player can just go in net,” said Niki Sawni, 27, who runs a goalie-rental service called Puck App.

By various estimates, there are as many as 8,000 rental-goalie orders every year in the Toronto area, which  suggests there is a sizable marketplace for the kind of person willing to play the bull’s-eye in a game of target practice.

“I’ve got a screw loose, sure,” said Mark Philipps, 46, who still tends goal but not so much as a rental goalie anymore. “It takes a special type of person to want to get a puck in the head.”

“You’ll run into some crazy ones,” said John McLeod, 55, a film actor who picks up work as a rental goalie in his off hours. “Very unusual characters, and I worry that I may be one of them, too.”

In Toronto, rental goalies — a cohort of mostly men and a few women — generally range in age from 18 to 65 and come from all walks of life: engineering, acting, education, policing, the trades.

Some even try to make itinerant goaltending their profession. Hamilton is one of those.

A musician who plays the vibraphone in a six-person folk band called Beams, Hamilton said he makes more money being a rental goalie than playing music in clubs.

He averages 10 games a week and keeps 40 Canadian dollars per game, paying 10 dollars in commission to a rental agency. His cut works out to about 1,600 Canadian dollars, or $1,220 in United States currency, a month. By his estimate, he has made well over 100,000 dollars in eight years as a rental goalie. And, yes, he said, he declares all of his income on his taxes.

“It’s not enough for a mortgage and kids’ education, but it’s just enough to get by,” he said. “There’s certainly more taxing ways to make a living. But I sweat and I come home with bruises.”

The rent-a-goalie concept has been around since at least 1985, when Doug Cardy, a former top junior goalie for the Toronto Marlboros, got tired of people “bugging me” to fill in on teams five or six times a week while he juggled a full-time job.

“I started telling them, ‘I want some money,’” said Cardy, a short-haul trucker. “And I started with a little cardboard sign in one of the arenas with my phone number.”

Cardy set up a business in which his goalies used pagers to check in for work. The money he scratched out wasn’t worth it, though, and Cardy, now 61, got out.

Goalies Unlimited was one of the first agencies to match games with goalies, in the mid-1990s. Since then, online competitors have proliferated, with names like Book a Goalie, MyPuck, Goalies to Go, Puck App, Rent a Goalie and Get a Goalie, which serves Buffalo and Chicago. Most of the agencies are run by current or former goaltenders.

Ian Peters, 44, started his operation in New York after growing tired of paying a $35 Uber fare each way to play goal in pickup games. He made a proposal three years ago to Ron Bursey, 37, who runs the Canadian operation Book a Goalie, and a New York tab was added to the Toronto-based website.

“It started like wildfire and the business blew up,” said Peters, who has about 70 goalies serving New Jersey, Connecticut and New York. “I do it all from my phone. There was resistance in the beginning, because New Yorkers weren’t used to paying for this service.”

Peters charges clients $70 a game, and a goalie gets $25 for his first five bookings and $30 for his next five. A goalie’s pay maxes out at $35.

 In Canada, rental agencies tend to take about 15 dollars in commission from the typical rate of $50 a game. Goalies like Hamilton, with eight years experience, can negotiate a lower commission. Sometimes, the business keeps it all. 

Daniel Smith, 57, a former high-level hockey player who became a jockey,   runs Goalies Unlimited. He likes to play four times a week, and as a rental goalie, he collects the full $50 fee each time.

Puck App, which Sawni founded three years ago, markets itself as the Uber of the goalie-rental business. With a smartphone app, it can undercut other services by charging a top rate of 45 dollars in Toronto, and even less in other cities.

Sawni has a database of 8,000 users across Canada, both goalies looking for paid work (about 5,000 so far) and clients looking for help in net.

On Puck App, a team can specify the site, the game’s starting time and the level of play. The offer is sent to all of the goalies in the database who match the criteria.

Patrick Herman, the owner of the MyPuck agency, has a roster of over 300 goaltenders and fills  orders for 15 to 20 games a day. The business can be cutthroat, he said, and he has little time for teams who try to play one service off another to get a better deal.

“If you want a pizza tonight, it’s not like you call Pizza Hut and Domino’s and tell them, ‘The first delivery driver that gets to my door gets my money,’” Herman said.

Some teams try to make side deals with players they like, but the agencies discourage goalies from disclosing their personal contact information to clients.

 Occasionally, the client is a fascinating character.

Joe Vercillo, 37,  once got a late request to work for a certain Canadian superstar in the music industry. 

“I got a call around 12:30 at night,” said Vercillo, who is in charge of acquisitions for a small publishing company. “It woke me up. My agent said: ‘Drake has rented the ice. Can you get over in 10 minutes?’”

Vercillo thought it was a prank because no one was inside the arena when he turned up. But soon Drake and his associates arrived, and Vercillo suited up for about 45 minutes of work. 

“They gave me 80 or 100 bucks for that,” Vercillo said.

 A representative for another well-known singer-songwriter  called Bursey’s agency in December 2017, requesting two goalies. Justin Bieber wanted to put together a game with some friends at a Toronto arena.

 “Bieber had his own entire dressing room,” Bursey said, adding that one of the goalies had told him that by the end of the game, “Teenage girls were all over the rink watching.”

 As at every level of the sport, some goaltenders are better than others. 

Daniel Altshuller, 24, a third-round draft pick of the N.H.L.’s Carolina Hurricanes in 2012, became a rental goalie last year to stay sharp after taking a season off.

“I had moved to Toronto and I didn’t know anybody,” Altshuller said. “I was just doing it mostly to find somewhere to play hockey.”

Others enter the marketplace for decidedly less professional reasons. Dan Madeiros, a commercial airline pilot, advertises his services at $40 an hour in the online classified forum Kijiji because, he said, he just likes to play.

“I have a job that pays me well,” said Madeiros, 42. “So I look at it that it’s paid exercise.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Mike Mazzeo

Alexandar Georgiev, an undersized goaltender no team seemed to want, was not supposed to get here.

Yet there he was on Feb. 10 at Madison Square Garden, repeatedly foiling the Toronto Maple Leafs’ shooting barrage. In all, Georgiev, an undrafted rookie, made a career-high 55 saves, carrying the Rangers to a 4-1 victory in a nationally televised game on his 23rd birthday.

It was the second-most saves for a goalie during a regular-season game in franchise history, after Mike Richter’s 59 on Jan. 31, 1991, but Georgiev was not upset with his teammates over all the rubber he faced.

“No. No. No,” Georgiev said in a recent interview. “It was a great day to be a goalie for the New York Rangers. It was fun.”

It has been a season of trying to look on the bright side for the rebuilding Rangers, who were sellers for a second consecutive trade deadline and will miss the playoffs for the second consecutive year. They have received various future assets, including young players and draft picks, and are in the process of evaluating and developing their young core.

After winning the backup goaltender competition in training camp, Georgiev has posted a 12-13-3 record in 30 games, along with a 3.05 goals-against average and a .909 save percentage. Last weekend, he beat the Maple Leafs again, making 44 saves in a 2-1 victory against the league’s second-highest scoring team. On Monday, the Pittsburgh Penguins beat him, 5-2, but on Friday night, he made 44 saves again, in a 4-2 victory over the St. Louis Blues.

He has managed to learn a lot from watching Henrik Lundqvist, the longtime face of the franchise. Backups to Lundqvist rarely play, but lately the two have been sharing time between the pipes. Lundqvist has posted an .895 save percentage since Jan. 1.

“His work ethic is at Hank’s level, but he’s also fast and quick like Hank,” Nick Bobrov, the Rangers’ director of European scouting, said in a reference to Lundqvist. Bobrov is primarily responsible for the Rangers’ eventually landing Georgiev. “He’s got the character and desire to be great.”

Rangers fans have taken notice of Georgiev’s skills.

While he made the 10-minute walk to the arena before a game from his Midtown Manhattan residence one day, a car stopped in the middle of the street and began beeping at Georgiev. A Rangers fan — who was also going to the game — jumped out of the vehicle, introduced himself, and asked if Georgiev would take a picture with his son.

“I wasn’t startled or anything, but it was a bit unusual,” said Georgiev, who obliged.

Georgiev took a pockmarked path to become the first Bulgarian-born player to reach the N.H.L. At 6-foot-1, he is on the short end for a pro goaltender.

The prevailing stigma is that smaller goalies take up less of the net, and therefore must be lightning quick to prevent pucks from beating them. That left Georgiev on the outside looking in.

“I was really disappointed about not getting drafted, and I wanted to prove people wrong,” he said. “That’s kind of been my career so far, proving to people that I can be more than they expect.”

Georgiev’s parents, Georgi and Natalia, moved to Moscow from Bulgaria when their son was a year old, giving him dual citizenship.

Georgiev began playing hockey when he was 5, but could not quite find his footing as a youngster in Russia. In search of improvement and opportunity, he left to attend a goalie camp in Turku, Finland, run by the former N.H.L. goalie Fredrik Norrena.

Georgiev eventually earned a recommendation to join TPS Turku, a club in the top Finnish league, and continue his development. Still, playing time was hard to come by early on, with older netminders ahead of him on the depth chart.

“I was sitting in the stands every game dreaming about the N.H.L. and feeling like I should be playing,” Georgiev said. “But I realized I had no control over it. So I practiced harder and tried to grind through the season.”

The Rangers’ front office got its first real look at Georgiev during the 2016 world junior championships. He wound up making the Russian team in a tryout camp, beating out Ilya Samsonov, a 2015 first-round pick of the Washington Capitals, for the starting job. He backstopped the team to a silver medal after a 4-3 overtime loss to a Finland team that featured the future N.H.L. stars Patrik Laine and Mikko Rantanen.

Bobrov said he was watching the tournament with the Rangers’ assistant general manager, Chris Drury. “We were saying among ourselves that it’s too bad he’s not bigger, because he’s very good,” Bobrov said.

The Rangers did not draft Georgiev in 2016 or 2017, his breakout season with TPS Turku, during which he led the Finnish Elite League in goals-against average. None of the other N.H.L. teams did, either.

It was not until Drury needed a goalie for the team’s A.H.L. minor league affiliate that Georgiev’s name resurfaced as a possibility.

“I said we have this kid ‘Georgie’ who we’ve been watching for two to three years now,” Bobrov said. “His size isn’t traditional for the N.H.L., but he’s been proving everyone wrong his entire life, and he’s still doing it. So why don’t we try him? We took a very educated guess that this kid would turn into something special.”

The Rangers invited Georgiev to their developmental camp — and after a daunting excursion to get his United States visa that included an overnight train trip — he earned an entry-level contract with the team on July 18, 2017.

Benefiting from his time working with the goalie coach, Benoit Allaire, Georgiev ascended much more quickly than anticipated, overcoming a slow start in the minors as he transitioned to a smaller North American rink that features different shot angles. He made his N.H.L. debut on Feb. 22, 2018, making 38 saves in a loss at Montreal before picking up his first career win the following night at the Garden.

It remains uncertain whether Georgiev will be the heir apparent for Lundqvist, who turned 37 this month and has two years left on his contract. The Rangers have another highly touted goalie prospect, 23-year-old Igor Shestyorkin, who has excelled in the Kontinental Hockey League in his native Russia. The team is in the process of bringing him to the N.H.L. next season.

Regardless, Georgiev has been in this position before, and his ultimate goal remains the same.

“I want to become a No. 1 goalie eventually,” he said. “And obviously help my team to win the Stanley Cup.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

COLUMBUS, Ohio — Matt Duchene is having a splendid time these days. It showed when he skated up to the glass to greet his wife, Ashley, and 3-month-old son Beau during warmups before the Columbus Blue Jackets won their third straight playoff game.

Nothing but smiles and "aaaws," a sweet moment for mom and dad shared with thousands of others via social media.

That night the 28-year-old Canadian center scored the first goal of the game for Columbus , a sweet backhander off a rebound to break a scoreless tie in the second period. The Blue Jackets went on to a 3-1 win in building a 3-0 series lead against the Tampa Bay Lightning, a team hardly anyone thought they could beat.

Duchene added an empty-net goal two nights later in the series-clinching 7-3 win, finishing the four-game sweep as the Blue Jackets' top scorer with three goals, four assists and a plus-5 rating.

Duchene, acquired by the Blue Jackets from Ottawa at the trade deadline, is having fun.

"It's a blast, man," he said Friday. "A great group of guys, and from day one I felt so comfortable. It's awesome to see our hard work, and these guys' hard work, and everything come together at the right time."

The contributions to the shocking sweep also pried a playoff monkey off the back of the 12-year NHL veteran. He tasted the postseason twice before while playing with Colorado but wasn't a major factor, finishing with no goals and six assists in eight games. The Avs were bounced in the first round both times, in 2010 and 2014.

Duchene yearned not only to get back to the playoffs, but to contribute and advance. He thought that could happen this season when Columbus general manager Jarmo Kekalainen rescued him and winger Ryan Dzingel from the sinking ship in Ottawa at the trade deadline.

Duchene had been told the Blue Jackets also were hanging on to stars Artemi Panarin and Sergei Bobrovsky — both will be unrestricted free agents after the season and have declined to re-sign with Columbus — to make an "all in" run at the playoffs. They needed another top center, and Kekalainen had been after Duchene for a couple years.

There wasn't instant symbiosis. Duchene had just four goals and eight assists in 23 regular-season games after being a point-per-game guy with Ottawa. The Blue Jackets finally began a surge that would see them win seven of their last eight and slip into the playoffs in the 81st game. Duchene then blasted off.

"I think that's the hardest part when you come to a new team, and you're used to be being a go-to guy on your old team," Columbus captain Nick Foligno said. "Now there's a lot of go-to guys on this team. You've got to find your way, and I think he's done a good job of that."

Coach John Tortorella said that while it didn't show up on the score sheet, Duchene was a major contributor in the last month of the season. He is Torts' kind of player. Hard worker, a thinker who loves to talk and understand hockey.

"I think (he's) come in from the get-go, no matter if he's put up numbers or not in certain situations, has played hard (and) has been very coachable," Tortorella said. "I've asked him to work away from the puck, and I've watched that every game, the concentration he's putting into playing away from the puck. He hasn't missed a beat with me."

Said Duchene: "Everyone wants to look at numbers and think it's all about that. We all played at a different level in the playoffs."

Columbus awaits the winner of the Boston-Toronto series.

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

BOSTON — The Tampa Bay Lightning won their NHL record-tying 62nd game, getting a shorthanded goal by Steven Stamkos during a three-goal second period in their 6-3 victory over the Boston Bruins on Saturday in the teams' regular-season finale.

Nikita Kucherov, Anthony Cirelli, Erik Cernak and Braydon Coburn also scored for Tampa Bay (62-16-4), which tied the 1995-96 Detroit Red Wings for most victories during the regular season.

Six of the wins, though, came in shootouts. The league introduced shootouts to decide ties after overtime at the start of the 2005-06 season. Before that, games ended in ties after overtime, which was brought in for regular-season games in 1983.

David Krejci, Danton Heinen and Matt Grzelcyk each had a goal for Boston (49-24-9), which fell one short of consecutive 50-win seasons since collecting four straight from 1970-71 through 1973-74. Tuukka Rask made 16 saves.

Kucherov will almost certainly win the Art Ross Trophy as the NHL's leading scorer with 128 points (41 goals, 87 assists) barring a record setting night Edmonton's Connor McDavid, who trails by 12 points.

Third-string goalie Edward Pasquale stopped 30 shots and Tyler Johnson added an empty-netter.

It was the Lightning's 30th road win, making them just the second team in league history to reach that total. The 2005-06 Red Wings had 31.

Both teams had a handful of players that were rested. Boston had a larger group that included top-line players Patrice Bergeron and Brad Marchand, who finished as the first Bruins player with 100 points in a regular season (36 goals, 64 assists) since Joe Thornton in 2002-03.

Trailing 2-1, Stamkos stole a pass and went in all alone, shifting around Rask before tucking a backhander into the net for an unassisted goal, tying it at 2 midway into the second. Cirelli's goal 4:07 later moved the Lightning ahead 3-2. Kucherov scored 53 seconds into the third.

Krejci's was credited with a goal 14:38 into the game that made it 1-0. Charlie McAvoy was originally given the goal after he collected a loose puck and fired it at the net as Krejci was charging toward the front.

Heinen beat Pasquale with a rising wrister inside the left post to make it 2-0 with 19.1 seconds left in the opening period. Cernak slipped a wrister past Rask from the slot for a power-play goal 4:41 into the second.

NOTES: Kucherov's goal gave him 127 points, tying Alexander Mogilny's mark set in 1992-93 for most by a Russian-born player. . Bruins defensemen Brandon Carlo, John Moore and Kevan Miller were out of the lineup along with forwards Chris Wagner and Noel Acciari. . Tampa Bay sat defensemen Victor Hedman, Anton Stralman and Mikhail Sergachev and forwards Cedric Paquette and Brayden Point. . Marchand won the Elizabeth Dufresne Trophy that's voted by the local chapter of the Professional Hockey Writers Association for the best performance during home games. . Boston's Charlie Coyle played his 500th NHL game.

UP NEXT

Lightning: Host Columbus or Carolina in the first game of the opening-round of the playoffs this week.

Bruins: Host Toronto in Game 1 of the first round, likely beginning Thursday.

Advertisement

CreditCreditGabriella Angotti-Jones/The New York Times

Supported by

By Allan Kreda

Photographs by Gabriella Angotti-Jones

Most N.H.L. teams do not have to look up where they are playing their home games, but such is the transient nature of the Islanders this season.

After 29 games of bouncing between Barclays Center in Brooklyn and Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, N.Y., the team’s quirky double-home-rink situation comes to an end, for now, after Saturday’s 5-2 win over the Edmonton Oilers in Brooklyn.

The Islanders’ remaining 12 regular-season home games will be at the Coliseum, the franchise’s home from 1972 to 2015. It is close to its practice facility and most players’ homes.

“I never had a problem with Barclays Center, but the Coliseum is just home,’’ Islanders forward Matt Martin said. “They were great to us in Brooklyn, but the Coliseum is where you get that true Islander experience.”

The disjointed season has not affected the team in the standings. After missing the playoffs the past two seasons, the Islanders (35-17-6) are surging under their new coach, Barry Trotz. They lead the Metropolitan Division ahead of the defending Stanley Cup champions, the Washington Capitals, the team Trotz coached last season.

The Islanders announced Friday that the team and its fans may have to make their way back to Brooklyn in the playoffs. Should the Islanders reach the postseason, the first round of home games would be played at Nassau Coliseum, but subsequent rounds would be at Barclays Center because, according to a team statement, “Nassau Coliseum does not qualify as an N.H.L. major league facility.” 

Nassau Coliseum, which was renovated in the team’s absence, is the smallest arena in the N.H.L., with a capacity of about 13,900. Barclays Center, which seats 15,795 for hockey, has 100 suites; the Coliseum has only 11. Maximizing revenue means playing where more premium seats are available.

It remains unclear how long the Islanders will continue to split time between two arenas and, to a degree, two fan bases.

In December 2017, the Islanders, with state officials, announced plans to build a new arena adjacent to Belmont Park Race Course. About a month later, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said the team would play about half of its 41 home games at Nassau Coliseum until the new arena opens in 2021. This season, the Islanders will ultimately play 21 games in Uniondale; the N.H.L. is not expected to release next season’s schedule until June.

The Islanders have sold out six of their nine games in Uniondale so far, while Brooklyn games were usually at about 70 percent capacity.

Attendance has suffered since the team moved to Brooklyn in 2015. This season, the Islanders are last in attendance, averaging a little less than 12,000 fans a game. 

But the differences in the two arenas go beyond numbers. Barclays Center, where in 2016 the Islanders won their only playoff series since 1993, was not built with a hockey rink in mind and has unusual sight lines. And most Long Island fans willing to drive to Nassau Coliseum will not often make the trek by train to Brooklyn, though the team’s playing close to Manhattan has attracted some new fans.

“Barclays Center works for me,” said Ed Wiatrak, a longtime season-ticket holder who drives to Brooklyn from Staten Island for almost every game. “The Coliseum winds up costing me more with gas, tolls and parking. But I will go wherever the team is playing.”

The return to the Coliseum has invigorated the fan base with the boisterous charm it had when the Islanders won the Stanley Cup four times in the 1980s. Fans are overjoyed to have the team back. The tradition of driving to Nassau Coliseum to tailgate and commiserate for hours before the opening face-off has been restored.

“I prayed they would come back to the Nassau Coliseum,” said Annemarie Briskie of Wantagh. “I like the tailgating where everyone is wearing their Islander jerseys and having fun. It feels like family. If Belmont never gets built, so be it. As long as we're here. Brooklyn always felt like a stopgap.”

In this renaissance season, the Islanders have benefited from being home no matter the arena. Heading into Saturday’s game, the Islanders were 6-1-2 this season on Long Island and 12-6-2 at Barclays Center.

Forward Cal Clutterbuck, an Islander since 2013, said the two-arena situation may be working to the team’s advantage.

“It’s a little unusual, but it’s not a negative,’’ he said. “Playing back at the Coliseum is a break from the grind of traveling back and forth to Brooklyn. It’s kind of nice.”

Grace Lee, the wife of Islanders captain Anders Lee, said she relished games at the raucous Coliseum but also liked the city feel of contests in Brooklyn. 

“Brooklyn is so close to our friends in Manhattan, friends from college who come to the games. We have gained fans there,’’ said Lee, who grew up in Chicago and was an All-American lacrosse player at Notre Dame. “And the Coliseum atmosphere is amazing. You feel wanted and loved there. The crowd, the noise, that fan connection is very special.”

An earlier version of this article misstated the number of suites at the Nassau Coliseum. There are 11, not eight.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Gary Santaniello

AMHERST, Mass. — When Coach Greg Carvel arrived at University of Massachusetts-Amherst from St. Lawrence University in 2016, he inherited a hockey program that had just two winning seasons since 1995 and had won only 11 conference games in Hockey East the previous three seasons.

“We were the joke of Hockey East for a while there,” said Kurt Keats, the only senior on the team who has been in the program for four years. “We definitely were not a source of pride for the university.”

But this season, the Minutemen won their first Hockey East regular-season title and advanced to their first men’s Frozen Four.

They will play eight-time national champion Denver University in the semifinals on Thursday night in Buffalo, with the winner facing the defending champion Minnesota Duluth or Providence in the championship game Saturday night.

Almost from the moment he arrived on campus, Carvel, who on Tuesday was named the national coach of the year, promised a change in culture and fortune for a program that was often overshadowed by in-state rival UMass-Lowell, announcing, “We’re not ZooMass, we’re NewMass.”

Still, in his first season, UMass had only five victories and lost its last 17 games. Last year UMass finished 17-20-2, but did win its first-round series in the Hockey East playoffs.

Signs of a breakthrough came early this season. The Minutemen won at Ohio State, ranked No. 1 at the time, in its second game, then rode a nine-game winning streak to the top spot, sweeping No. 4 Providence along the way. They are ranked fourth in the most recent poll, and are the only Division I men’s team that did not lose consecutive games this season.

UMass takes a 30-9-0 record to the Frozen Four, but after earning its berth in Buffalo, even Carvel admitted, “We’re way ahead of schedule.”

The Minutemen produced this surprising season with one of the youngest rosters in college hockey. Of its 25 skaters, 19 are freshmen and sophomores, including the first-year Finnish goalie Filip Lindberg.

Lindberg took over the starting job from the sophomore Matt Murray, who had won 20 games, in the Hockey East quarterfinals sweep against New Hampshire and has posted three shutouts since. In the N.C.A.A. East Regional, UMass outscored Harvard and Notre Dame by a combined 8-0.

The team’s marquee player, though, is the sophomore defenseman Cale Makar, the No. 4 overall pick in the 2017 N.H.L. draft. He is expected to join the Colorado Avalanche in the Stanley Cup playoffs as soon as his college season ends.

Along with St. Cloud State’s Jimmy Schuldt and Harvard’s Adam Fox, also defensemen, Makar is a finalist for the Hobey Baker Award, given to the most outstanding player in college hockey. The winner will be announced on Saturday.

Carvel left no doubt on how he thinks the vote should go, saying last week of Makar: “He’s the best player in college hockey. It’s not even close.”

According to Brian Willsie, the development consultant for the Avalanche, Makar has all the qualities necessary for success in the N.H.L.

“To say he’s a mobile defenseman is an understatement,” Willsie said. “His skating is what blows you away. It’s on a different level.”

With 16 goals and 32 assists, Makar, a native of Calgary, Alberta, is tied for third in the nation in scoring. With three points in Buffalo, he would become the first defenseman to lead the nation in points.

“In tight games, in the third periods, he knows how to win games,” Willsie said. “He’s such a driven, focused kid.”

Northeastern Coach Jim Madigan has seen enough of Makar the last two seasons to say, “ He has all the makings of a 15-year pro.”

Makar anchors a defense that is UMass’ strength. Not only are the Minutemen sixth in the country in goals against average (1.97), but their defensemen have accounted for 39 goals and 87 assists, powering an offense that is third in the country at 3.77 goals per game.

Forward Brett Boeing said UMass’s aggressive style starts with its defense.

“We want to force turnovers and then control the play,” he said. “When we’re playing well, you can see the frustration on the other team.”

Carvel, 48, was not thinking about immediately reaching Frozen Fours when he took over the program in 2016.

UMass had been a Division II program when it dropped men’s hockey in 1979. The sport didn’t return to Amherst until the 8,389-seat Mullins Center opened in 1993. After one year as an independent, when it won 20 games, UMass joined Hockey East for the 1994-95 season. UMass received an at-large bid to its first N.C.A.A tournament in 2007, losing to Maine in the quarterfinals.

Despite losing records in all but two of its Division I seasons before this one, the Minutemen have produced N.H.L. players, among them goalie Jonathan Quick and forward Conor Sheary, who have won Stanley Cups.

Carvel’s first objective was to identify the right players to take the team forward.

Keats, who played 35 games as a freshman, was one of those players under the microscope.

“When he came in, we knew he wanted to weed guys out,” Keats said.

That first season, Keats said, players bought in to Carvel’s message, “but we didn’t see the results.”

For the 2017-18 season, Carvel brought in 13 freshmen, including Makar and fellow defenseman Mario Ferraro, the No. 49 overall pick by the San Jose Sharks in 2017. A different attitude arrived with them.

“You could see something starting to develop,” Keats said.

In a season of few regrets, Carvel said he wished success had come earlier for players like Keats and Boeing, who were around when the program was floundering.

“I think they’re a little wistful about that, how success came late in their time at UMass,” he said. “But they will always carry that they were part of the group that turned this program around.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Allan Kreda

John Tavares knew that things would not be easy for him Thursday night, when he made his first visit to the Islanders since leaving them to become a Toronto Maple Leaf.

Many Islanders fans, emotionally bruised by the departure of Tavares, the longtime team captain, had vowed to vent their anguish at Nassau Coliseum, expressing disgust over his decision last summer to sign as a free agent with Toronto, his hometown team.

They followed through. Outside the arena before the opening face-off, several people burned No. 91 Tavares sweaters on grills or in trash cans. Others wore Tavares’s old Islanders sweater but replaced his name with “Traitor.”

When Toronto took the ice for warm-ups, Tavares was greeted by a chorus of boos. Fans pressed against the glass on the visitors side of the rink chanting, “We don’t need you.”

The Islanders — after surrendering the first goal — demolished the Maple Leafs, 6-1, and the acerbic chants only grew louder as Tavares was held pointless. The Islanders also won the first meeting between the teams, 4-0, in Toronto on Dec. 29.

“I’m just trying to play hockey. So for everyone else, I can’t speak for them,” Tavares said after the game. “They have their feelings and it’s out of my control.”

Tavares, 28, who became the face of the Islanders after they chose him first over all in the 2009 draft, expected this kind of greeting. It was inevitable that he would be cast as the villain in an arena where he long generated cheers.

During his time on Long Island, Tavares was active in the community, visiting schools and hospitals every season. He played hard for lackluster Islanders squads, making the playoffs only three times in nine seasons.

Tavares also worked to assimilate with a seemingly ever-changing cast of linemates and watched as close friends like Matt Moulson and Ryan Strome were traded by Garth Snow, the general manager from 2006 to 2018.

Tavares was playing under a team-friendly, six-year, $33 million contract before last summer, when he became an unrestricted free agent for the first time.

The Islanders could have asked Tavares to waive his no-trade clause at last year’s trade deadline to give the franchise a chance to recoup assets for him, its best player. But management and ownership chose to keep Tavares and let him reach the open market. Six teams, including the Islanders, met with Tavares before he decided to leave.

He had been the foundation of the franchise for so long, it was hard to imagine a future without him. A long-term commitment to the Islanders seemed implicit in December 2017, when Tavares was present at Belmont Park as the Islanders announced plans for their future arena on the racetrack grounds.

Tavares, who is soft-spoken, also frequently said last season that he hoped to stay with the Islanders. But he was ultimately swayed by the opportunity to return home, signing with the Maple Leafs for seven years and $77 million.

“It was a tough pill to swallow for everyone,” Anders Lee, the captain of the Islanders this season, said recently. “As teammates, we wanted him on our team. Fans wanted the same thing.”

Tavares is second in scoring for the Leafs, who are strong contenders from the Atlantic Division. He has 36 goals and 32 assists through 64 games; his career high for goals in a season is 38 in 2014-15.

Without Tavares, the Islanders have become the surprise of the N.H.L. They lead the Metropolitan Division under Barry Trotz, their new coach, and are almost surely heading to the playoffs for the first time in three seasons.

But on Thursday, cheering for one of the best Islanders teams in years was not enough for many of the home fans.

Midway through the first period, the Islanders presented a video tribute to Tavares, similar to others that have accompanied a star player’s return to his former city. When Mark Messier came back to New York after signing with Vancouver in the summer of 1997, he was reduced to tears as images of him appeared above the Garden ice.

This time, the arena filled with boos and profanity, drowning out any audio from the tribute. Players from both teams watched and tapped their sticks. Tavares clapped his blue Maple Leafs gloves together several times before play resumed.

“It was nice to give my appreciation for nine years here for everyone who supported me,” Tavares said.

The former Islanders forward Colin McDonald was Tavares’s roommate on Long Island for two-plus seasons starting in 2013. Each attended the other’s weddings in recent summers and remain close friends. McDonald said recently that he knew Tavares’s personality would help him endure any vitriol.

“John invested everything he had into that organization,” said McDonald, 34, now captain of the Lehigh Valley Phantoms in the American Hockey League. “He is human, and of course that’s not the reaction he’s looking for. But as far as learning to deal with stuff you can’t control, I have never met someone who can handle it like John.”

Tavares spoke often of how he relished playing in front of the boisterous crowds at Nassau Coliseum. The cozy arena shook in April 2015 when Tavares scored an overtime winner in the playoffs against the Washington Capitals, just as it did countless other times for the star center who had 272 goals as an Islander.

“I loved my time as an Islander,” Tavares said in early February, when the Leafs played the Rangers at Madison Square Garden. “Now I love being a Maple Leaf. It was the right fit for me. It was still the hardest decision I have ever made.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

BOSTON — Maple Leafs forward Nazem Kadri temporarily went to the locker room after a knee-on-knee hit from Jake DeBrusk in the second period.

When Kadri retaliated late in the third, he was done for good.

Kadri drew a game misconduct for cross-checking DeBrusk in the face , leading to Boston's final goal, and Tuukka Rask stopped 30 shots to help the Bruins beat Toronto 4-1 on Saturday night and tie the first-round playoff series at one game apiece.

"Obviously, he got frustrated," Bruins forward Chris Wagner said when asked if he thought the hit merited a suspension. "The league can take a look at that and they can decide."

Two nights after Toronto beat Boston 4-1 in the opener to steal away home-ice advantage, the Bruins took a 3-0 lead with a 29-16 edge in shots on goal into the third period. Brad Marchand, Patrice Bergeron, Charlie Coyle and Danton Heinen all scored for the Bruins.

But the main event was DeBrusk and Kadri, who mixed it up all night before Kadri took a shot at him with about six minutes left in the game, drawing a game misconduct. Bergeron scored a minute later to make it 4-1 and clinch it.

Kadri, who was suspended for three games in last year's first-round series, could be facing some missed time this year, too.

"It ain't easy, but at the same time we know that going in. You have to keep your composure," Leafs forward John Tavares said. "Not everything's going to go your way. Things aren't going to be called that you think should be called, and we just have to stay with it."

Kadri scored the Leafs' only goal midway through the third, and Frederik Andersen made 37 saves for Toronto, which returns home for Games 3 and 4 on Monday and Wednesday nights. Kadri was not made available to reporters after the game.

"Things were getting pretty amped up there toward the end of the game. A lot of emotions. That's what playoff hockey is all about," Marchand said. "That's what we all look forward to, but at the same time you have to control your emotions. It's not always the easiest thing."

Severely outplayed in Game 1, the Bruins responded from the start, calling upon speed and toughness they failed to show in the opener.

Coyle made it 1-0 less than five minutes in on a feed from behind the net from David Backes, who had been a healthy scratch in Game 1.

With four minutes to play in the period, Toronto defenseman Jake Muzzin failed to glove a lofted puck at center ice, and David Pastrnak retrieved it. He spun around and fed it to Marchand, who put it between Andersen's legs to make it 2-0.

Another turnover led to Boston's third goal midway through the second. After some bad passing in the Toronto zone, William Nylander wound up with the puck next to the net. He lost control of it and Heinen just poked it past Anderson's skate to make it 3-0.

Kadri deflected a shot from Travis Dermott past Rask to deprive him of the shutout.

NO CALLS

Kadri had an eventful few minutes near the end of the second period.

He was sent off for hooking, and he came back on the ice just in time to sneak up on David Krejci from behind and poke the puck away before Kadri was knocked to the ice by a knee-on-knee hit from DeBrusk.

Kadri went to the locker room favoring his left knee.

No penalty was called.

Muzzin also knocked Bruins defenseman Torey Krug out of the game with a hit against the boards.

"The referees let a lot of stuff go, obviously," Toronto coach Mike Babcock said. "But in the end you can't let that get in the way of doing what you're doing."

GRONK IS A NATIONAL TREASURE

Rob Gronkowski got a huge cheer when he vigorously waved a Bruins flag before the opening faceoff. The retired New England Patriots tight end served as a fan banner captain along with Massachusetts Special Olympian Matt Millett.

UP NEXT

The series shifts to Toronto for Games 3 and 4 on Monday and Wednesday night. Game 5 is back in Boston on Friday night.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

RALEIGH, N.C. — The Carolina Hurricanes lost another forward — and won another playoff game.

"'Next guy up' has been the memo lately," rookie Warren Foegele said.

Enough of them have stepped up to even their series with the Washington Capitals.

Carolina beat the defending Stanley Cup champions 2-1 on Thursday night to square the series at two games apiece, with Teuvo Teravainen scoring the go-ahead goal with 27.9 seconds left in the second period.

Foegele scored 17 seconds in, giving him three goals in two home games, and Petr Mrazek made 30 saves for Hurricanes.

They lost another key forward to injury yet fed off the energy of the largest hockey crowd in PNC Arena history to win their second straight on home ice after routing Washington 5-0 in Game 3. Road teams have yet to lead — much less win — in this series.

"All we've done," Hurricanes captain Justin Williams said, "is hold serve."

Alex Ovechkin scored a power-play goal and Braden Holtby finished with 22 saves for the Capitals, who hadn't lost consecutive games in regulation since late January but lost key forward T.J. Oshie "for a while" after he was hit by Foegele late in the third, coach Todd Reirden said.

Foegele received a boarding minor for his hit with 5:08 remaining that left Oshie doubled over in pain as he skated to the dressing room.

"It was a defenseless player that was quite a distance from the boards," Reirden said. "It's an extremely dangerous play, and he will not be with our team for a while."

The ensuing power play gave the Capitals their best chance to tie it down the stretch, but Mrazek stopped a pair of bang-bang shots from Nicklas Backstrom and Tom Wilson as the penalty expired.

Oshie had been moved to Ovechkin's top line before the game in an attempt to shake things up after that Game 3 rout. The Capitals also moved Wilson down to Evgeny Kuznetzov's second line.

Ovechkin called the two losses in Raleigh "a wake-up call for all of us.

"We can't hope that one guy is going to make a save or score a goal," he added. "You have to go out there and play your game. If you don't want to do it, don't play."

Injuries have been a critical subplot during the series for the Hurricanes, who have lost three forwards in two games.

"We got way more injuries than they do," Carolina coach Rod Brind'Amour said.

The latest to go down was Jordan Martinook, who appeared to sustain a right knee injury after his heel slammed into the boards while attempting a first-period hit on Dmitry Orlov in the offensive zone. Brind'Amour said he may have reaggravated a lower body injury that has nagged him for a while.

Martinook briefly returned later in the period but did not play after that. Rookie Andrei Svechnikov was in the concussion protocol after taking a punch from Ovechkin in Game 3 and physical forward Micheal Ferland also was out with an upper body injury.

But Teravainen and Foegele were at full strength — and the Hurricanes needed them.

Teravainen put the Hurricanes up 2-1 with 27.9 seconds left in the second. Sebastian Aho passed to Nino Niederreiter, who found Teravainen streaking down the center of the ice and he slipped the puck between Holtby's pads for his first goal of the series.

"I don't know what happened there," Teravainen said. "I saw Nino get the puck, and I was a little open, so I just took a couple steps and I had a pretty good chance. ... I just closed my eyes and put it in."

That came after Ovechkin tied it at 1 with 9:25 remaining in the second and with 8 seconds left on a hooking minor to Teravainen. His one-time blast from the circle off a pass from Orlov got past a stickless Brock McGinn and by Mrazek.

Foegele, who scored the first two goals of Carolina's Game 3 romp, immediately picked up where he left off and put them up 1-0 with the quickest goal they've ever scored in a playoff game. Carolina caught the Capitals with an early 2-on-nobody rush and Jaccob Slavin passed to Foegele, who scored into an open net.

"He's a prototypical playoff guy," Williams said of Foegele. "I feel like he's kind of built for playoffs."

NOTES: The record crowd was announced at 19,202. ... Carolina D Calvin de Haan played for the first time in the series. He had been out since March 31 with an upper body injury. ... Svechnikov skated earlier in the day.... Washington scratched D Christian Djoos while rookie D Jonas Siegenthaler made his series debut.

UP NEXT

The series shifts to Washington for Game 5 on Saturday night.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

TAMPA, Fla. — Tampa Bay general manager Julien BriseBois said Thursday he is not going to overreact to the Lightning's historically quick postseason exit and he still has confidence in coach Jon Cooper.

After tying the NHL record for wins during the regular season, the perennial Stanley Cup contender became the first team in the expansion era to be swept in the first round of the playoffs after leading the league in points. Three of the four games against Columbus were decided by at least two goals.

"What really compounds the disappointment is that we didn't play anywhere near our best hockey during the series. And now, the question is why? Why didn't we play our best when it mattered the most," BriseBois said.

"The reality is it's not something that I'm going to be able to pinpoint to any one thing," BriseBois added. "I know it would make it a lot easier for all of us if we could have a clear narrative. We lost because of, fill-in the blank. The reality is it's a lot more complex than that."

The Lightning won 62 games, matching the league mark set by the 1995-96. While the players said they believe they are a team built for success in the playoffs, an inability to get back to the Stanley Cup Final the past four years suggests otherwise.

"Now is not the time to make excuses, it's a time to show some humility," BriseBois said. "It's the time for us to lick our wounds. Roll up our sleeves, get to work and focus on doing what we need to do so that next year we're more successful."

Cooper, in the final year of his contract, was given a multiyear extension on March 26.

"My faith in Coop has not waivered at all," BriseBois said.

Tampa Bay had three players — Steven Stamkos, Nikita Kucherov and Brayden Point — score 40-plus goals. Kucherov had a league-leading 128 points, the most by any player since 1995-96 when Pittsburgh's Mario Lemieux had 161 and teammate Jaromir Jagr had 149.

All three were mostly non-factors against the Blue Jackets.

Stamkos had one goal and one assist, and finished minus-8. Kucherov, suspended for Game 3 for a boarding penalty the previous game, picked up two assists and was minus-4. Point scored one goal and was minus-5.

"It's just another opportunity wasted," Stamkos said. "We have all the players in place but at the end of the day you're judged on winning championships. There's no real words. We say a lot of things, but you have to go out on the ice and do it, and we didn't do it."

Tampa Bay scored 325 goals in the regular season — most by any team in 23 years — but was outscored 19-8 by the No. 8 seed Blue Jackets.

The first-round debacle was just the latest in a string of postseason disappointments. The Lightning held a 2-1 lead in the 2015 Stanley Cup Final before losing to Chicago in six games. In 2016 (Pittsburgh) and 2018 (Washington), Tampa Bay failed close out 3-2 series leads in the Eastern Conference finals.

This year's collapse stung, too, because it not only came against a team the Lightning dominated during the regular season, but Columbus is also coached by John Tortorella, who was behind the bench for Tampa Bay's only Stanley Cup championship in 2004.

"We put ourselves in this position because we didn't meet our expectations," Cooper said. "I'm going to relish the moment when we're all back here again and we have met those expectations as a group."

WARNING SIGNS?

The Lightning had a tendency to fall behind during the regular season, posting 29 comeback wins, an NHL record.

"In a lot of those games we out-skilled out of those games," left winger Alex Killorn said. "But in the playoffs, there's times where you're not going to be able to skill your way out of it. I think just we have to play a more playoff mentality throughout the season. Build your way into playoffs."

PLAYER MOVEMENT?

Point is a restricted free agent who is in line for a potential offer sheet. Defensemen Anton Stralman, Dan Girardi and Braydon Coburn are all unrestricted free agents.

INJURIES

2018 Norris Trophy winner Victor Hedman (upper body) played in Games 1 and 2 after missing the final four regular season games but sat out the final two playoff games. ... Stralman (lower body) never got on the ice. ... Killorn played Game 4 with a slight MCL tear that won't require surgery.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

DENVER — Summoning Johnny Hockey! His scoring prowess is required ASAP.

After a 99-point regular season, Calgary All-Star forward Johnny Gaudreau has been held to a single assist and just 12 shots against Colorado. It is a big reason why the top-seeded Flames trail the Avalanche 3-1 in a first-round series that heads back to Calgary for Game 5 on Friday night (10 p.m. EDT, NBCSN).

Gaudreau's linemates, Sean Monahan and Elias Lindholm, have been held in check, too, with a goal apiece. Even more, captain and Norris Trophy candidate Mark Giordano has two assists in the series. This after finishing second in scoring among defensemen during the regular season.

No panic, though. Just action.

"Everyone has to look at their own games and be better," Gaudreau said. "We've got to get back to the way we were playing all year."

Either that, or summer starts early. The Flames are on the brink of being knocked out in the first round, just like Tampa Bay — the top seed in the East.

Dating to the expansion in 1967-68, there have been various playoff formats in the NHL from division-based, conference-based and for two seasons, '79-80 and '80-81, the top 16 teams being seeded by regular-season points. At no point over that time have the top two teams in each division or conference — or the teams with the two best records — been eliminated in the first round, according to the league.

"It will be tough. Obviously we'd rather be 2-2 than 3-1," Lindholm said. "Go back to Calgary, we have a good crowd there for us, try to come back and play even better than (Wednesday) and hopefully get a win. Then it's game on again."

The Flames don't have a monopoly on vanishing stars in this postseason. Tampa Bay's Steven Stamkos and Nikita Kucherov had one goal and three assists between them in being swept by the Blue Jackets; while Sidney Crosby only had an assist as Pittsburgh lost four straight to the New York Islanders.

Nathan MacKinnon and Mikko Rantanen have been as advertised for Colorado. They have a combined six goals and five assists.

"Our depth," MacKinnon said, "is very underrated."

In particular, J.T. Compher (two goals) and Matt Nieto (two short-handed tallies).

"They don't get enough credit for what they've done all season, how much they've contributed," MacKinnon said of Colorado's supporting cast. "It's very encouraging that we can flip the switch. You don't have to play a perfect game to win."

Game 5 can't get here soon enough for Flames center Mikael Backlund , who had a forgettable final flurry in a 3-2 overtime loss to the Avalanche on Wednesday. He took a late tripping penalty that led to Rantanen's tying goal in regulation. In overtime, Backlund had a perfect view on Rantanen's winning shot soaring right past him.

No time to hang their heads, though.

"We have nothing to lose now," Backlund said. "I don't think a lot of people think we can do it but we can. We've faced a lot of adversity and if there's any group I believe in and know they can do it, it's this group right here."

It starts with Gaudreau, who's been bottled up in the series with Colorado clogging the middle of the ice. Gaudreau and his teammates just can't seem to break free.

"We'll regroup," Giordano said.

Keeping them in games is goaltender Mike Smith , who's stopped 99 of 108 shots over the last two contests.

"I'm just one little cog," Smith said. "It's nice to have personal success but when you don't get the results it doesn't matter. You need to do more."

TORONTO at BOSTON (7 p.m. EDT, NBCSN)

The Bruins threw a wrinkle at the Maple Leafs by shuffling their lines. It did the trick during a 6-4 win Wednesday to tie the series at 2-2. David Pastrnak had two goals, while Brad Marchand added a goal and an assist.

Just the sort of boost the team was hoping for with Game 5 on Friday in Boston.

"We got some bounces" Wednesday, Marchand said. "Hopefully we get them next game."

The changes by the Bruins didn't bother the Maple Leafs as much as miscues.

"I thought our matchups were fine. That, to me, wasn't it," Toronto coach Mike Babcock said. "We just made some mistakes. Gave up some opportunities that we didn't need to give up."

Maple Leafs goaltender Frederik Andersen has already set aside the loss in which he surrendered five goals on 30 shots.

"Short memory," Andersen said.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

DALLAS — The bounce-back effort by Ben Bishop after a tough game didn't surprise Dallas Stars coach Jim Montgomery.

Dallas also got a power boost to go with Bishop's 34 saves, scoring three power-play goals in the first period on the way to a 5-1 victory over the Nashville Predators on Wednesday night to even the best-of-seven series at two games each.

"It was nice to see the power play do it in such a dominant fashion," Montgomery said.

Roope Hintz and Alexander Radulov scored power-play goals on Dallas' first two shots, and the Stars chased Nashville goalie Pekka Rinne with four goals on eight shots in less than 14 minutes.

"It's nice to see the guys did a great job in front of me and get that lead in the first 15 minutes, made it a little easier on me," Bishop said. "I thought everybody, top to bottom, played a great game and doing all the small things it takes to win."

Bishop allowed a couple of soft goals in Game 3 in his home playoff debut with Dallas, when the Predators won their second consecutive game after the Stars won the series opener in Nashville.

Hintz, who started the season with the Stars and was sent to their AHL team three times before returning for good Jan. 29, added his second career playoff goal in the second period. That came on John Klingberg's third assist of the game.

"We played desperate from the start," Klingberg said. "We came out and set the pace right away."

Game 5 of the Western Conference first-round series is Saturday in Nashville.

The Stars were 1 of 13 on the power play in the first three games, but went 3 of 4 in the first period of Game 4. It was the first time they scored three power-play goals in one period of a playoff game since moving to Dallas before the 1993-94 season.

"Our kill, which has been so solid for a couple months now, you never want to see three go in like that," Predators center Nick Bonino said. "They made some nice plays. They picked some corners. That's going to happen."

 Andrew Cogliano and Mats Zuccarello also scored as part of the Stars' four goals against Rinne before Juuse Saros replaced him and stopped 20 of 21 shots. Rinne, who started his 87th consecutive playoff game for Nashville, had stopped 40 of 42 shots in Game 3.

"It's frustrating when you're geared up to win a hockey game, and you look up and it's 4-0 on the board with five minutes to go in the period," Nashville coach Peter Laviolette. "You're battling back at that point, and the frustration is easy to let into the game."

Zuccarello's third goal of the series was a power play goal, and made it 4-0.

 Dallas led 1-0 when Hintz scored on a pass from Klingberg only 3:42 into the game. The Stars were back on the power play only 90 seconds later, and converted again when Radulov got his second goal of the series .

"I don't think any of the first three (goals) were Pek's fault. He's played fantastic to this point," Laviolette said, mentioning multiple times two redirects and an initial pad save on another shot. "Hard to fault (Rinne) on those goals and those situations, the circumstances and situations we put him in."

The Stars had scored only 39 goals in the first period all season — through 82 regular-season games and then had none in the first three games of this series that were all decided by one goal.

Nashville hadn't allowed three power-play goals in a single period this season, or faced a four-goal deficit after the first period.

The Predators didn't score until more than eight minutes into the third period, when Roman Josi shot from the slot in the middle of the circles. The puck whizzed to the right of Bishop, who had a lot of traffic in front of him.

NOTES: Josi has two goals in this series. In 32 career regular-season games against Dallas, Josi has 10 goals and 15 assists. The only team he has more goals against is Colorado, with 11 in 32 games. ... Dallas scored four goals in one period for the first time in its last 33 playoff games — since a 5-2 win over San Jose on April 27, 2008. The franchise record is five, the last by the North Stars in April 1994 against St. Louis. ... The Predators lost in Dallas for the first time this season. They were 3-0 in the regular season before winning Game 3. ... Dallas snapped a four-game home playoff losing streak.

UP NEXT

The series switches to Nashville for Game 5 on Saturday afternoon, then back to Dallas for Game 6 on Monday night.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

DENVER — A wide-open Cale Makar screamed toward Nathan MacKinnon to deliver him the puck.

That made an instant impression with MacKinnon on a night when Makar made an immediate impact. This newly signed rookie isn't intimidated by the stage or his surroundings.

MacKinnon scored twice in the first period and set up Makar's first NHL goal in his debut as the Colorado Avalanche routed the Calgary Flames 6-2 on Monday to take a 2-1 lead in their first-round playoff series.

"It's pretty weird. Pretty special, though," Makar said of his first game. "Obviously, it's a cool moment."

Matt Nieto added a short-handed goal, and Mikko Rantanen and Erik Johnson also scored for the wild-card Avalanche, who built a 6-1 lead early in the third period and finished with 56 shots. Philipp Grubauer was credited with 27 saves.

MacKinnon had two power-play goals. But the goal of the night was turned in by Makar, the 20-year-old defenseman who was signed Sunday and jumped into Colorado's postseason lineup two days after his college season ended when Massachusetts lost in the Frozen Four championship game.

Makar, who grew up a Flames fan in Calgary, was the fourth overall pick by the Avalanche in 2017.

It didn't take long for Makar to make a big contribution as he took a drop pass from MacKinnon, fought off a Flames defender and beat goalie Mike Smith with a wrist shot — on his first NHL shot on net, too. Makar was immediately mobbed by teammates as his parents celebrated in the stands.

"I heard him, too. He was calling for it," MacKinnon said. "First game ever and he screamed at me. That's great. You want a player to be aggressive, assertive, and I was really impressed by that."

Sam Bennett and TJ Brodie scored for the Flames, the top seed in the Western Conference.

Game 4 is Wednesday night in Denver.

"We've got to regroup here, and stick together as a team," Calgary defenseman Mark Giordano said. "There wasn't much good, honestly, throughout the night. We made that team look and feel good all night."

There was talk of pulling Smith after the second period, just to save some energy. He didn't want to surrender the net.

"As a goalie in this league, you want to battle no matter how many goals have gone in," Smith said.

Things got physical in the third period with the game out of hand. First, Bennett was given a misconduct penalty for a fight with Matt Calvert. Later, Matthew Tkachuk received a misconduct penalty for mixing it up with Avalanche captain Gabriel Landeskog, who had a cut under his eye. Finally, Garnet Hathaway and Nikita Zadorov were sent to the dressing room for their skirmish.

"I thought it got away from us early and obviously we chased the game the rest of the game," Flames coach Bill Peters said.

The first period was a debacle for Calgary in falling behind 3-0. The team took two penalties on one play — hooking and too many men — to give Colorado an early 5-on-3 power play. MacKinnon sent in a high wrist shot over Smith.

Later in the first, the Flames were called for another penalty and MacKinnon added another power-play goal.

Still, it might be MacKinnon's pass that is best remembered. He set up Makar at 16:02 of the first period. The NHL communications department said on Twitter that Makar became the seventh player in NHL history and first defenseman to make his debut in the Stanley Cup playoffs and score a goal.

Wearing No. 8, Makar jumped on the ice early in the game and was given a loud cheer by the capacity crowd. About the only hiccup was in the second period when he lost control of the puck with no one around near his own goal. But he gained control just before it hit the post, with Grubauer looking back.

It's certainly been a whirlwind week for Makar: He won the Hobey Baker Award on Friday as college hockey's top player before losing to Minnesota Duluth on Saturday in the title game. He signed a three-year deal with Colorado on Sunday and arrived in town later that night.

Now, he's donning an Avs sweater against the team he grew up rooting for. He practiced with Colorado for the first time Monday morning.

While in college, he caught his fair share of Avalanche games.

"When I wasn't doing homework and other stuff," Makar said. "I like the way they play. They're very fast."

NOTES: Tkachuk slid into the boards in the second period and lost a blade on his skate. ... Avalanche D Samuel Girard was out with an upper-body injury. ... Avalanche D Ian Cole had two assists. ... The 56 shots were the most by Colorado in a playoff game since June 10, 1996, at Florida. That total was also 56, in Game 4 of the Stanley Cup Final.

UP NEXT

Calgary will try to tie the series in Game 4 on Wednesday night in Denver.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

DALLAS — Nashville goalie Pekka Rinne withstood a flurry of shots when the Dallas Stars had an extended power play in the second period, including a 5-on-3 advantage.

Then came his incredible save with the game tied midway through the third before the Predators got the game-winner.

Rinne stopped 40 shots, including seven when the Stars skated with an advantage for 2½ consecutive minutes, and Mikael Granlund scored on a wrist shot with 8:19 left to push the Predators to a 3-2 victory Monday night for a 2-1 lead in their best-of-seven Western Conference playoff series.

"He's the backbone of this franchise. He has been for a very long time," defenseman P.K. Subban said of Rinne, who made his 86th consecutive playoff start for the Predators. "He's one of our most important players, if not the most important, and he showed that again tonight."

After three consecutive one-goal games, Game 4 is Wednesday night in Dallas.

Granlund's tiebreaker came only about 3½ minutes after the Stars got even at 2 on a goal from Tyler Seguin off a backhand pass from Stars captain Jamie Benn following some interesting puck play behind the net.

Stars fans wanted a penalty when Subban was on the back and reaching over Alexander Radulov in a battle for the puck. But play continued and seconds later Benn delivered a spot-on pass from the side of the net to Seguin in front.

Right after that, Benn had a point-blank shot that Rinne pushed aside with his skate to keep the game tied.

"He was terrific all night," Predators coach Peter Laviolette said. "At that point, you're under fire a little bit, they start to grab the energy in the building. ... That save was big."

Granlund, acquired in a trade with Minnesota in late February, got the puck from Dante Fabbro after Kyle Turris won a faceoff against Benn.

Rocco Grimaldi scored in his second game in a row for the Predators, and Filip Forsberg had a perfectly timed play for a goal.

Mats Zuccarello also scored for the Stars, who played their first home playoff game in three years. American Airlines Center is less than 5 miles from the Cotton Bowl Stadium where they will play the Predators outside in the Winter Classic on New Year's Day next season.

"Never get too high, never get too low," Stars first-year coach Jim Montgomery said. "It's 2-1, I think we've been the better team two out of three games. Keep playing like that, usually hockey gods get back on your side."

Nashville led 1-0 when Grimaldi took a shot from outside the right circle and got the puck past an unobstructed Ben Bishop, who finished with 25 saves.

Grimaldi didn't have a goal in the last 13 regular-season games after scoring Feb. 19 at Dallas. The center was a scratch in the opener of this series scored a goal in Game 2 while filling in for Brian Boyle, who had an appendectomy after Game 1 and is considered week-to-week.

The Predators led 2-0 when Nick Bonino flicked the puck high in the air — his pass went airborne from the circle left of Rinne along the boards and over both blue lines. Forsberg was at the blue line when the puck was over his head, and delayed enough to avoid going offside before gaining control and charging in for the goal.

Montgomery said the Stars looked at replays when considering a challenge, but after seeing several angles "thought it was onside clearly."

NOTES: Dallas was 0 for 4 on power plays and is 1 for 13 in the series. Nashville is 0 for 8 after failing to score on its only chance with an advantage. ... Nashville is 3-0 in Dallas this season, after also winning both regular-season games there. ... Stars C Jason Dickinson was bleeding after being slammed into the boards by Colton Sissons late in the first period. It was the second time Dickinson took a big hit in this series. He went to the locker room and went through concussion testing after a collision with Boyle in Game 1. ... Like Boyle, RW Wayne Simmonds is week-to-week. Simmonds took a shot off his knee in Game 2. ... A Stars fan was removed from the area near the Nashville penalty box after the second period. ... Dirk Nowitzki was back in the building where a week ago he announced his retirement after a record 21 seasons with the NBA's Dallas Mavericks and was honored with an elaborate ceremony after his final home game. The crowd went wild when Nowitzki was shown in a suite wearing a Stars playoff T-shirt and waving a rally towel.

UP NEXT

Game 4 on Wednesday night in Dallas, before the series shifts back to Nashville for Game 5.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

For all the value of postseason experience, youth is off to a nice start in the Stanley Cup playoffs.

Teenage defenseman Miro Heiskanen built on his stellar rookie season in his playoff debut with Dallas, 19-year-old Andrei Svechnikov tried to carry Carolina back from a big deficit, early 20-somethings Mitch Marner and William Nylander continue to be among Toronto's best players and young Matthew Tkachuk did his part to finally win a playoff game with the Calgary Flames.

The NHL is getting younger and more skilled, and youth is being served in a big way early in the Stanley Cup playoffs. They may not get the attention like Winnipeg's Patrik Laine or Toronto's Auston Matthews, but Heiskanen and Svechnikov turned in two of the more impressive playoff performances in recent history for players before their 20th birthdays.

"Some people, it's hard and some people it's pretty easy, and those are the people it looks like it's pretty easy," Hurricanes forward Teuvo Teravainen said of Svechnikov and fellow Finn Heiskanen. "They don't stress too much. They just go out and play and have some fun."

Svechnikov became the youngest player in 22 years to score twice in a playoff game and the third teen to put up two goals in NHL postseason history after Pierre Turgeon in 1988, Eddie Olczyk in 1985 and Don Gallinger in 1943. The 2018 second overall pick will try to help Carolina even its first-round series against Washington in Game 2 Saturday (3 p.m. ET, NBC).

"There's not pressure on him," Hurricanes captain Justin Williams said. "Just go do it. Go enjoy it. Go have fun. That's what this time of year is about, and we're going to need even more from him if we're going to advance."

The Stars won in Nashville thanks in large part to Heiskanen's goal and assist in Game 1 . At 19 years, 266 days old, he became the youngest defenseman in franchise history to score in the playoffs and the fifth teenage rookie defenseman with two points in his postseason debut.

"My 19-year-old year, when it was April, I was drinking beers in my frat basement," Dallas defenseman Ben Lovejoy said. "What he is doing is just incredible. It's so special. He is so good, it is just such a pleasure to watch him play and to be on his team. He's such an asset. He's going to do this for 20 years and I can't wait to watch him."

Coach Jim Montgomery would love to see Heiskanen and 22-year-old rookie Roope Hintz play like this for several more weeks. Game 2 in Nashville is Saturday (6 p.m. ET, CNBC).

In Boston, the Bruins have to be better in Game 2 (8 p.m. ET, NBC) on Saturday after losing the series opener on home ice. Marner was a big part of that with his two-goal game, including being just the fifth player to score a shorthanded goal on a penalty shot in the playoffs.

"He's an elite player in the league at a young age," Bruins coach Bruce Cassidy said. "Years ago I remember (people saying about Wayne) Gretzky, 'Why doesn't anybody hit that guy?' Well, it's not that easy."

It's not easy to hit or stop Nylander, either. The 22-year-old Swede scored for the second consecutive game and appears to have solved his late-season dry spell.

"It's good for me," Nylander said. "I've been thinking just to hit the net and get it on it."

In Calgary, Tkachuk's two goals a series-opening victory against the Colorado Avalanche snapped his six-game goal drought, though the 21-year-old's agitating ways stuck as much as his scoring. Teammate Andrew Mangiapane, 23, also scored in his playoff debut and the West's top seed is off and running with Game 2 Saturday night in Calgary (10:30 p.m. ET, NBCSN).

"Now all of those guys have got their first game out of the way, they should get some confidence," coach Bill Peters said. "We'll get better as the series goes along."

INJURY WATCH

Even in the hockey-speak of upper- and lower-body injuries, playoff time brings an extra cloud of secrecy. Seemingly everyone is day-to-day or a game-time decision.

That's the case for Carolina defenseman Calvin de Haan, who practiced Friday after missing the past six games with an upper-body injury. Coach Rod Brind'Amour said he hopes de Haan can play "at some point" and added defenseman Jaccob Slavin was fine after getting a day off for playing a lot of minutes Thursday night.

Boston forward Jake DeBrusk is questionable with the injury that knocked him out of Game 1 against the Maple Leafs. Cassidy said if DeBrusk can't play, veteran David Backes will go into the lineup.

___

AP Sports Writers Teresa M. Walker in Nashville and Jimmy Golen in Boston contributed.

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

WINNIPEG, Manitoba — Pat Maroon set up the winning goal for the St. Louis Blues, and his thoughts immediately turned to his late grandfather.

Tyler Bozak scored with 2:05 left in the third period off Maroon's assist to give the Blues a 2-1 victory over the Winnipeg Jets on Wednesday night in Game 1 of their Western Conference opening-round playoff series.

"He was watching above," Maroon said of his grandfather, who died Tuesday at 95 years old. "So, obviously, that was for him."

Maroon sent a backhand pass from behind the net out to Bozak in the slot, and Bozak's quick shot went by Winnipeg's Connor Hellebuyck for the go-ahead goal.

"It's been emotional, tough days for me," said Maroon, who posted a tribute to his grandfather on Twitter. "But being with the guys and having them by my side has been really good."

David Perron also scored for St. Louis early in the third, and Jordan Binnington made 24 saves.

"I had a lot of chances tonight, so I knew the puck was kind of following me around a bit," Bozak said. "It's always fun when that happens, so after the few I missed it was definitely nice to get one in there."

Patrik Laine scored late in the first period and Hellebuyck stopped 24 shots for the Jets, who host Game 2 on Friday.

"Real tight, and that's what we expect," Jets captain Blake Wheeler said of the game. "We expect it's going to go seven, and seven real close games. It didn't go our way tonight."

The goalies played a big role in keeping the game tight, even though Binnington took an early tumble to the ice.

Winnipeg's Mark Scheifele was sent to the penalty box 34 seconds into the first period for interference. As he was skating to the back of the St. Louis net, he banged into Binnington, who was behind the net and returning to his crease. Blues forward Brayden Schenn shoved Scheifele hard in retaliation, but only drew boos from fans and not a penalty.

"It's playoff hockey," Binnington said. "I can take a hit."

Laine sent a blast from the high slot past Binnington at 13:38. The Finnish forward only had one goal in his last 19 games of the regular season.

"We've had a couple of those where they score the winning goal in the last two minutes," Laine said. "So it's always tough, but that's how it goes sometimes. We still had two minutes to tie the game, but couldn't do it. We've got to focus on the next game."

St. Louis outshot the Jets 8-7 in the opening frame, with Laine having two shots.

On the eve of the series, Laine said his confidence wasn't high and he planned to shoot every puck he could at Binnington to try to make the rookie nervous. The 20-year-old also said the Jets "have better players in this locker room than they have" and when they're on their game "we're just a better team."

Jets defenseman Dustin Byfuglien helped divert a St. Louis goal early in the second period. Vladimir Tarasenko fired a shot at Hellebuyck and the puck trickled out from under him toward the goal line, but Byfuglien swooped in and slapped it out of the crease.

Winnipeg's penalty kill worked twice more in the second period. Binnington then came up big on a backhand breakaway shot by Par Lindholm and a quick shot from Andrew Copp.

The Jets got their first power play of the game with 3:09 left in the middle frame. Byfuglien had his team's two shots with the man advantage — one was stopped and the other hit the post.

Laine rang a shot off the post just over one minute into the third, followed by Perron's point shot through traffic that went by Hellebuyck to tie it up at 4:05. The Winnipeg netminder blocked a Bozak shot late in the period and then couldn't stop the winner.

Hellebuyck was pulled right away for the extra attacker, but Binnington slid across his crease to make an impressive pad save on Scheifele's one-timer with under 12.4 seconds left.

"The mindset was just compete to the end and give the team a chance to win," Binnington said. "That buzzer couldn't have come sooner."

NOTES: Winnipeg (47-30-5) and St. Louis (45-28-9) tied for second in the Central Division with 99 points. The Jets earned home-ice advantage with three more combined regulation/overtime victories than the Blues. ... Last season, the Jets soared into the playoffs on a 9-1 run and made it to the Western Conference final, losing to Vegas in five games. The Blues missed the playoffs.

UP NEXT

Game 2 of the series is Friday night in Winnipeg.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

WASHINGTON — So much went right for the Washington Capitals that the chants from the crowd changed by the shift.

Fans chanted for Nicklas Backstrom's four points, Braden Holtby's 30-save shutout, Devante Smith-Pelly's return to the NHL and T.J. Oshie's absence that is arguably the biggest obstacle to Washington going back-to-back.

Oh, and there were those chants, too as the defending Stanley Cup champions blew out the Carolina Hurricanes 6-0 in Game 5 on Saturday night to take a 3-2 series lead and move one victory away from advancing to the second round.

In their first game since Oshie was knocked out indefinitely with an upper-body injury, the Capitals got two goals from Backstrom, power-play goals from Alex Ovechkin and Tom Wilson and secondary scoring in the form of a goal by Brett Connolly and a successful penalty shot by Nic Dowd to make a statement that they were back after laying an egg in two road losses that evened the series.

"That was a pretty great response," Backstrom said after matching his 2018 playoff total with five goals through five games in this first round. "We weren't satisfied with the games in Carolina. Tonight we played some Caps hockey, I thought. Everyone bought in to everything, we worked together and it paid off."

Ovechkin assisted on Backstrom's second goal and Connolly's first of the playoffs to again lead the way in a postseason win. The reigning playoff MVP has three goals and four assists so far in the series and is hurting the Hurricanes with more than just his patented shot.

Backstrom, who is known more for his passing, had five goals in 20 games during the Capitals' Cup run a year ago that included missing four games with two fractures in his right pointer finger. He and Ovechkin were two of the best players on the ice Saturday with their team in a precarious spot.

"Obviously they got on the point sheet, but their play away from the puck, on the forecheck, supporting each other, they're real tough to play against when they play like that," said Holtby, who set a franchise record with his seventh playoff shutout. "I thought they've been doing a great job all playoffs, too. You can tell that they want to win, and the rest of the team will follow."

There were more leaders than followers in this rout, and that included penalty killers who salted away all five Carolina power plays. Three successful penalty kills in the second period of what was then a one-goal game helped the Capitals blow the game open.

"That was a game-changer for us," said Backstrom, who made it 2-0 just 19 seconds after the final penalty kill in that stretch expired. "Kill 'em off and then we got going after that. You need that in games like this."

Hurricanes goaltender Petr Mrazek was hung out to dry in allowing six goals on 28 shots, and their power play came up empty when even a few scoring chances would've built some momentum and couldn't match Washington's high-powered unit.

"They scored a couple power-play goals, we stunk it up on ours," Carolina captain Justin Williams said.

As much of a complete effort as it was for the Capitals, it was that much of a missed opportunity for the upstart Hurricanes, who looked frazzled at times after dominating long stretches of the past two games. For the fifth time in five games, the team that scored first — and the home team — won, something the Hurricanes hope to continue back at home facing elimination.

"We've just got to make sure at home we get that first one and get our crowd into it," said defenseman Jaccob Slavin, who was on the ice for five Capitals goals. "It's do or die now."

After showing what they could do without Oshie and with Smith-Pelly back from a two-month stint in the minors for salary-cap reasons, the Capitals are another performance like this from facing former coach Barry Trotz and the New York Islanders in the second round. But before tackling that, they have to finish off the upstart Hurricanes, who have shown they can respond just as well despite being playoff newcomers.

"It's a win," Holbty said. "We regroup, we know they're going to come harder next game and we'll focus on that."

NOTES: Dowd's penalty shot goal was the first in franchise playoff history. ... The Capitals improved to 11-3 this season without Oshie. ... Carolina F Aleksi Saarela became the first player in Hurricanes/Hartford Whalers franchise history to make his Stanley Cup playoff debut before appearing in a regular-season game. Saarela replaced Jordan Martinook (lower-body injury) in the lineup. ... LW Andrei Svechnikov took part in the Hurricanes' morning skate and said he hopes to play in Game 6 after being concussed in a fight with Ovechkin in Game 3. ... F Micheal Ferland missed his second consecutive game with an upper-body injury.

UP NEXT

The Hurricanes could set another arena attendance record Monday when they look to stave off elimination in Game 6.

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

HUMBOLDT, Saskatchewan — Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau is lauding the "courage and professionalism" of first responders and the resilience of the community a year after the fatal bus crash of a junior hockey team.

The prime minister says in a statement Saturday that while "we cannot forget pictures of the wreckage" that shook all of Canada "what will stay in our hearts forever are images of compassion and strength."

Trudeau notes the examples of "young men learning to stand, walk and take to the ice again," and "hockey sticks leaned up against thousands of Canadian front doors."

A memorial service is to be held in the Humboldt arena to remember the 16 people killed and 13 injured. The Humboldt Broncos bus collided with a semi driven by a novice trucker who ran a stop sign at a rural intersection.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

PITTSBURGH — Jim Rutherford's question was rhetorical. The answer — whenever the Pittsburgh Penguins general manager arrives at — will determine how the franchise emerges from the rubble of a first-round playoff sweep at the hands of the New York Islanders.

"Are guys too content with where they're at in their careers because they've won a couple of Stanley Cups?" Rutherford wondered aloud Thursday as his team packed up for its longest offseason in 13 years.

Just 22 months removed from becoming the first team in a generation to win consecutive championships , captain Sidney Crosby and the rest of the Penguins are at a crossroads.

"It's disappointing to have this long of an offseason," said Crosby, who posted the sixth 100-point season of his career but managed just one against the Islanders. "It's been a while since we've had this much time really."

Failing to three-peat by losing to the eventual Stanley Cup champions in six hotly contested games against an archrival — as Pittsburgh did last spring when it lost to Washington in the second round — is one thing. Scoring just six goals while getting outskated, outplayed and outworked by a team with a new coach, a journeyman goaltender and little playoff success over the last quarter century is quite another.

"(The Islanders) played the right way and they were eager to win," Rutherford said. "They were determined and the Penguins weren't."

Maybe the end shouldn't have been so stunning. Though the Penguins extended their playoff streak to 13 years and counting, they only sporadically played the kind of intelligent and responsible hockey coach Mike Sullivan has tried to instill from the moment he took over in December 2015.

Injuries to stars like Evgeni Malkin and Kris Letang didn't help. Neither did a significant amount of roster turnover. Yet Pittsburgh's best stretch came during a 10-3-3 sprint through March , one the Penguins made with Malkin and Letang available only occasionally. Sullivan pointed to an increased "cooperative effort" by the group with Malkin and Letang missing, a key ingredient in "what it takes to win."

When they returned full time for the playoffs, the cohesion vanished.

Malkin ended a wildly uneven year by struggling to find the dominance that once came so easily. Letang, whose play over the first four-plus months helped the Penguins rebound from a decidedly sluggish start, had a handful of miscues against the Islanders that led immediately to pucks in the back of the Pittsburgh net.

The question going forward is whether Letang, Malkin and forwards Patric Hornqvist and Phil Kessel — all of whom will be 32 or older when next seasons open — can make the necessary adjustments to their respective games over the next six months to make sure they stick around for the rest of a championship window Rutherford insists remains open.

All four have had highly successful careers and were integral parts of the core group that raised two Stanley Cup banners to the rafters at PPG Paints Arena. All four, however, also have a penchant for taking risks, gambles they could afford to make because their talent often helped them recover when those gambles went awry.

That wiggle room is gone. The evidence came during a series in which the Penguins led for less than five minutes.

Crosby — who will be in the conversation for the Selke Trophy given annually to the league's top defensive forward — insists his longtime teammates can adapt.

Letang isn't really sure he has to. Asked if he will take a more defensive-oriented approach heading into his 14th season, he bristled.

"At the end of the day, yeah, I wish I could have done something else at different times, but I don't think the question is to change my whole game," Letang said. "I'm not going to change three plays in my whole year for the type of game I play."

And there's the dilemma for the front office. The Penguins have to decide whether they need to adjust their style or their personnel — or both. Whether they can find takers for veterans with their names on the Cup multiple times but also multiple years left on lucrative contracts will play a factor. Either way, Sullivan believes there needs to be a renewed focus when his team — however it is constituted — returns in September.

"The challenge is to make sure that there's 100 percent buy-in throughout the lineup," Sullivan said. "I think the area of our identity that we lost a little bit is the hard-to-play-against aspect."

NOT SO THIN BLUE LINE

Rutherford defended the play of his defenders, Erik Gudbranson and Jack Johnson specifically. Both are big bodies not known for their skating. Gudbranson was solid after arriving in a trade with Vancouver while Johnson played all 82 games before being a curious healthy scratch for Game 1 against the Islanders.

"I think our defense is probably the best that's it has been since I've been here as a group," Rutherford said.

SEE YA DAD?

Matt Cullen had seven goals and 13 assists and remained a faceoff wizard — particularly in the defensive zone — in his 21st season. The 42-year-old, however, seems headed for retirement to spend more time with his wife and three boys. His leadership and character will be difficult to replace.

"I think just he's such a pro in the way he approached every day, the way he led by example, the way he treated guys," Crosby said. "He can still play."

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

DENVER — This classifies as fun for Frederik Andersen: Protecting a late lead in the third period by leaping out of his net to stop a shot with the handle of his stick.

Sticky situation handled.

"Doing whatever it takes to save it," the Toronto goaltender explained after the 3-2 win Monday over Boston. "Fun one."

Going into the postseason, there were some reservations concerning such goaltenders as Andersen, Philipp Grubauer of Colorado and even Pekka Rinne of Nashville. They have each responded in a big way with Andersen, Grubauer, Rinne helping stake their teams to 2-1 leads in their first-round series.

All three look to come up clutch yet again in Game 4 on Wednesday night.

Like Andersen, Rinne turned in a huge save in a 3-2 win Monday over Dallas — sliding over from his knees to stop left winger Jamie Benn's attempt with his left goalie pad.

"Every once in a while he makes one like that where you roll your eyes and say, 'How did he do that?'" Nashville defenseman P.K. Subban said. "He's been doing that for a long time, though."

Rinne, the reigning Vezina winner, wasn't exactly vintage Rinne a season ago in the postseason, allowing 21 goals in a second-round series loss to Winnipeg that was extended to seven games. So far this season, Rinne has a 1.98 goals-against average against Dallas and a .936 save percentage.

Now that's more like Rinne, who led the Predators to the Stanley Cup Final in '17.

"Peks made a couple unbelievable saves in the third there," Filip Forsberg said. "It's what the playoffs is all about."

Andersen entered the postseason on the heels of a bad stretch to end the season, when he allowed 35 goals over his last 10 appearances.

Against Boston, he's made 108 saves and none bigger than his stop of center David Krejci on Monday. Andersen lunged out of his net as Krejci made a move to the backhand. He kept his goalie stick close to the ice and had the puck deflect off the end.

The chants of his name by the fans only intensified.

"Playoff time, this building comes alive. It's a special place to play," Andersen said. "It makes you want to play even harder."

A year ago, Grubauer started the first two games of the Stanley Cup title run for the Washington Capitals before surrendering the net to Braden Holtby. Grubauer was dealt to Colorado in the offseason and he began as the backup to Semyon Varlamov. But Grubauer took over late and went 7-0-2 down the stretch help the Avalanche earn the No. 8 seed. He's allowed seven goals and made 90 saves against the Flames, the top seed in the Western Conference.

"We have to be in the moment and I think we're doing the right things right now," Grubauer said after a 6-2 win, the second in a row for the Avs.

Holtby appreciates the grit of Grubauer.

"He's too good of a goalie to not have success over time," Holtby said. "It's great for him. Obviously he's had an adjustment to a different situation, adversity he's grinded through. He's a strong guy mentally, so it doesn't come as a surprise to any of us."

BOSTON at TORONTO (7 p.m. EDT, NBCSN)

Boston forward Patrice Bergeron remains confident his line will crank up the production.

Bergeron, David Pastrnak and Brad Marchand have combined for three goals in three games against the Maple Leafs after a regular season in which they had 106. One of the reasons is the defensive work of Toronto's offensive line of John Tavares, Mitch Marner and Zach Hyman.

"It's tight right now. There's not much space," Bergeron said. "We believe in ourselves and know we're playing a good team and a good line."

NASHVILLE at DALLAS (8 p.m. EDT, USA)

At 5-foot-6, Predators center Rocco Grimaldi is one of the shortest players in the NHL. He's certainly coming up big in this series, scoring in consecutive games.

After going into the lineup for Game 2 — filling in when 6-6 center Brian Boyle had an appendix issue following Game 1 — Grimaldi had his first career playoff goal Saturday with a stick coincidentally named "Frankie" — on the three-year anniversary of the death of his grandfather Frank. He added another goal, with a different stick, in Game 3.

CALGARY at COLORADO (10 p.m. EDT, NBCSN)

The Flames watched film as a group in lieu of practice Tuesday. Among the topics discussed was getting back to playing the way they played in amassing a Western Conference-best 107 points. Johnny Gaudreau has been held in check, with just one assist in the series. He had 99 points in the regular season.

"Everyone's got to be better, not just one guy," Gaudreau said. "All of us are going to be better next game."

Calgary is searching for a way to slow down MacKinnon, who has three goals, including an OT winner in Game 2.

"We're going to have to make sure we eliminate some of that ice he's had available through three games," Flames coach Bill Peters said.

___

AP Hockey Writer Stephen Whyno and AP Sports Writer Stephen Hawkins contributed to this report.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

Excuse Derick Brassard for having a little difficulty finding his bearings after the veteran center took an unorthodox cross-country route in reaching the NHL playoffs.

Starting the season with Pittsburgh, Brassard was traded to Florida and spent 10 games with the Panthers before landing in Colorado in time to help the Avalanche's late-season surge to clinch the Western Conference's eighth and final playoff berth. Brassard is also re-adjusting to center after playing on the wing in Florida.

"It's been kind of a weird season for me personally. By coming here, I had to try to adjust quickly," Brassard said Monday as Colorado prepares for a first-round matchup against Calgary. "I feel like I'm fitting in really well. I wish I could chip in a little more. I think it's been three or four games, since I'm back to my normal position."

Brassard, who has four goals in 20 games for Colorado, was one of 32 players involved in 20 deals struck at the NHL trade deadline on Feb. 25.

Brassard's acquisition — Colorado gave up a third-round draft pick — wasn't the most notable of the day. And yet it was a reflection of numerous teams' approach to addressing needs before making a final playoff push and beyond.

The Winnipeg Jets led the way in completing six trades, including acquiring veteran center Kevin Hayes from the New York Rangers. Central Division rival Nashville responded by acquiring forwards Mikael Granlund from Minnesota and Wayne Simmonds from Philadelphia. Vegas struck what was the most impressive deal by landing forward Mark Stone in a multiplayer trade with Ottawa.

The trades don't include various deals struck in the days leading up to the deadline, such as Columbus' addition of Matt Duchene and Ryan Dzingel in separate swaps with Ottawa.

And while other teams were wheeling and dealing, teams such as Presidents' Trophy-winning Tampa Bay elected to stand pat. The Lightning roster was already deep and talented at all positions.

"Well, I think if I was as the GM in Tampa, I'd probably stand pat, too," former NHL executive turned broadcaster Brian Burke said. "They're the class of the league this year."

In the end, Burke wondered how many of the trades will truly make the difference in determining the Stanley Cup champion.

"The trade deadline, so many mistakes are made," Burke said. "(You have) 15 teams making moves at the deadline, and there's (only) one parade."

Of the 16 playoff teams, only two — Pittsburgh and Colorado — were sitting outside the top eight spots in the conference standings on Feb. 25. Montreal dropped out in the East and Minnesota in the West.

The Jets' additions failed to push them ahead of the Predators in the race for the Central title, though they were enough to keep Winnipeg ahead of the late-charging S. Louis Blues. Winnipeg was a point behind Nashville on Feb. 25 and finished the season in the same position.

Jets general manager Kevin Cheveldayoff, however, believes his team is better prepared in opening the playoffs against St. Louis.

"They've meshed in," Cheveldayoff said of the newcomers.

"They've gone through the newness process," he added. "That's over. They're just like every one of us now."

In Nashville, the Predators believe they added leadership to the locker room and more of a hard-hitting presence on the ice in preparing to open against Dallas.

"Just seeing who we match up against in the playoffs, it's those heavier teams, bigger bodies and having guys up front who can handle the bigger D," defenseman Ryan Ellis said. "The moves we made made our team better."

In Columbus, the Blue Jackets went all in by adding to their roster rather than subtracting players such as goalie Sergei Bobrovsky and forward Artemi Panarin — both eligible to become unrestricted free agents this summer. Panarin led the team with 87 points, while Bobrovsky closed the season by going 10-3, including four shutouts.

Add in the likes of Duchene, Dzingel and defenseman Adam McQuaid, and the Blue Jackets believe they have the depth for a daunting first-round matchup against Tampa Bay.

"They've been through the trenches with us. They've been able to feel a part of this team, take ownership of this team and know their role within it," Blue Jackets captain Nick Foligno said. "You look at it, and we're four deep everywhere. Our defensive core is set. It just makes you feel more confident."

In Washington, the defending Stanley Cup champions benefited by adding forward Carl Hagelin and defenseman Nick Jensen.

Hagelin, a trusted two-way forward, had three goals and 11 points in 20 games with the Capitals after combining for just eight points in 38 games split between Pittsburgh and Los Angeles. Jensen's addition is even more important with defenseman Michal Kempny sidelined with a lower body injury.

"I think they kind of filled holes that maybe we had really well," defenseman Brooks Orpik said. "Even if Kemper didn't get injured, I think adding another good NHL guy was important for us."

___

AP Hockey Writer Stephen Whyno in Arlington, Virginia, and AP Sports Writer Pat Graham in Denver contributed to this report.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

NEW YORK — Lou Lamoriello and Barry Trotz say they didn't know exactly what to expect from the New York Islanders this season.

There were plenty of questions after the Islanders gave up 293 goals — the most in the NHL since 2006-07 — while missing the playoffs for the eighth time in 11 years. There was uncertainty on offense when star center John Tavares left in free agency for his hometown Toronto Maple Leafs.

"There were a lot of unknowns. We had no preconceived notions," Lamoriello said. "Whatever expectations there were, there were really none one way or another."

The answers have come in the form of a stunning one-year turnaround that has the Islanders in the second round of the playoffs. New York gave up a league-low 191 goals, charged to the top of the Metropolitan Division and just swept the star-laden Pittsburgh Penguins in the first round.

Knowing some had picked them to miss the playoff again, players just shrug it off.

"That's kind of been a little bit of the story line here and we're used to it," said Anders Lee, who succeeded Tavares as team captain. "That's just the way it's been, not just this year, it's kind of always been that way. This year we've really taken it on and run with it."

Both Lamoriello and Trotz say they knew they were going to give up fewer goals with a better defensive approach.

"We wanted to play a certain way," Trotz said. "We knew we could fix the goals against, that's commitment and that's work ethic, detail and structure."

The 76-year-old Lamoriello, whose long career includes building the New Jersey Devils into an NHL power a generation ago, vowed to bring a culture change to the Islanders when he took over as the president of hockey operations last May. A few weeks later, he fired general manager Garth Snow and coach Doug Weight.

Trotz was hired as coach in June, days after he led Washington to its first Stanley Cup championship and then abruptly resigned in a contract dispute. The hiring was celebrated by the Islanders' rabid fan base, which has seen just one postseason series win since 1993 — a far cry from the glory days of winning four championships in a row.

After losing Tavares, Lamoriello went about filling the roster with players with winning experience. Veterans like Leo Komarov, 32, and Valtteri Filppula, 35, were brought in to help the development of youngsters like Anthony Beauvilier. And 27-year-old Tom Kuhnhackl, who won two Stanley Cups with the Penguins, was also a solid addition.

"We were looking for good people, the people who have won," Trotz said. "That's so important for our growth as an organization and a group coming in. We looked for character people and Lou did a great job."

The Islanders have embraced Trotz's swarming, defense-first system.

"It's helped us all along," said forward Josh Bailey, now the longest-tenured Islander in his 11th season with the team. "It's a big part of our identity and I think the more results we've seen as the season went on, the more belief (it fostered) in one another and what we were doing, and trust in our staff and everyone."

A big question in the offseason centered on goaltending after Robin Lehner was signed to pair with Thomas Greiss. Lehner was with Buffalo the previous season and left a game down the stretch because of a panic attack and was subsequently treated for alcohol and drug addiction and also diagnosed with bipolar disorder, ADHD and PTSD. He talked openly about his personal life when he joined the Islanders, and credited the organization and his new teammates with giving him support.

Greiss and Lehner were solid all season. Greiss went 23-14-2 with a 2.28 goals-against average and five shutouts while Lehner was 25-13-5 with a 2.13 GAA and six shutouts. The two shared the William Jennings Trophy for the team allowing the fewest goals in the league. Lehner started all four games in the series against the Penguins, limiting them to six goals on 136 shots, and is a finalist for the Vezina Trophy.

The focus on defense has meant playing with more discipline. And while a few players enjoyed boosts in their offensive production, it meant reductions for others, including Mathew Barzal, Lee, Bailey and Jordan Eberle. The sacrifices have resulted in more overall success.

"We play as a team," Trotz said. "I think everybody has given up a part of themselves to be a part of something greater."

The coach points to a road trip in December that became a springboard for the rest of the season. They had lost five of the previous nine after the Thanksgiving weekend, and then won three of four, shutting down high-scoring lines for Colorado and Dallas.

"I think from that point we really trusted our game," Trotz said. "We were sort of in-between a little bit and that sort of galvanized the group."

In the second game after Christmas, the Islanders went to Toronto and shut out the Maple Leafs 5-0 in their first game playing against Tavares. It was part of a stretch in which the Islanders went 16-2-3 from Dec. 8 to Feb. 2 to jump to the top of the division.

"I came into this team and talked to the guys straight in the summer and a lot of the guys said 'We're going to go far,'" Lehner said. "That just grew during the season when the system started to jell and we started playing together."

They Islanders say they're not simply satisfied with just getting to the second round, where they will face either Carolina or Trotz's former team, the Capitals.

"We're nowhere near where we want to be at," Bailey said. "You have to win four (series) to win it all."

___

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

Whenever Eric Desjardins reunites with his 1993 Montreal Canadiens teammates, the topic of Canada's ongoing Stanley Cup drought doesn't come up in conversation.

"We don't see it that way. Canadian team, American team, it's just that we were part of the NHL," the former star defenseman said. "Sure, it's been a while in Montreal, but we don't really talk about the 26 years."

That's right. With the NHL playoffs set to open Wednesday, it will be going on 26 years since the Canadiens — or any other Canadian team — brought home the Cup.

Desjardins, who enjoyed a 17-year career split between Montreal and Philadelphia, chalks up the drought to NHL expansion across the United States and league-wide parity ushered in with the introduction of the salary cap in 2005.

"It's supposed to be our national sport, and we're supposed to be the best at it," said Desjardins, who's from Montreal. "But now, the way the league's structured I think it could go anywhere. ... I think anybody can win it now. And I think it makes it more interesting."

Still, the 49-year-old acknowledged a quarter century between Cups in Canada is far too long, and Desjardins can see himself rooting for any Canadian team making it to this year's Final.

"If the Final's between Pittsburgh and Winnipeg, yeah I would root, even though I like Pittsburgh," he said. "But yeah, against Calgary, Winnipeg, I would cheer for the Canadian team."

Canada's Cup hopes this spring rest on three teams — Calgary, Winnipeg and Toronto — to end the drought. Of course, most current Canadian-born NHL players weren't alive to see Desjardins and Co. celebrate their five-game series win over the Wayne Gretzky-led Los Angeles Kings.

Sabres forward Jason Pominville is among the exceptions.

He was 10 when his hometown Habs won, and Pominville still vividly recalls Game 2 of the series in which Desjardins scored all three goals in Montreal's 3-2 overtime win after the Canadiens lost the opener.

"I remember watching that and celebrating in my living room, and fist-pumping when he scored," Pominville said. "I was a big fan of Gretzky, too. But when you're in Montreal, it's tough not to root for that team when you're growing up."

In Montreal, there was a time when winning the Cup was considered a birthright. The Canadiens still top the list with 24 championships, 23 coming after the NHL was founded in 1917.

And yet, Montreal hasn't reached the Final since '93, while only five Canadian teams have done so; Vancouver is the only one to make two appearances during the drought, in 1994 and 2011.

Then there are the Maple Leafs, who haven't reached the Final since winning the Cup in 1967, the last year of the NHL's Original Six era.

The low point might have been the 2016 playoffs, the first since 1970 to not feature a Canadian team

This was not always the case. From 1927 to 1995, the lengthiest stretch for a Canadian team not appearing in the Final was two years. It last happened in 1991-92, when Pittsburgh won consecutive championships by beating Minnesota and Chicago.

As for Canada's lengthiest Cup drought before the '93 Habs, it was a six-year span from 1936-41.

The current drought has gone on for so long, former executive-turned broadcaster Brian Burke said the math simply doesn't add up.

"It doesn't make sense. There's 31 teams, so seven out of 31 teams, a Canadian team should win every four-and-a-half years," said Burke, who has worked in the front offices in Vancouver, Toronto and Calgary.

The problem, Burke said, is Canadian teams are at a disadvantage because many players don't want to play north of the border for several reasons.

The first, he said, is a lack of privacy and the amount of pressure placed on players to win north of the border. Burke said a large number of players, including Canadians, often list all seven Canadian teams on the no-trade clauses of their contracts.

"Even in Calgary, we had our lists where players got to put 10 teams on a no-trade list, and all the Canadian teams were on those lists," he said.

The second issue is Canada's taxation rate.

"There's no privacy. Horrible personal criticisms on social media, and then you take home way less money, so it's pretty easy," Burke said.

He can only imagine how much national attention will be paid to the next Canadian team to win it all.

"The next GM that wins a Cup in Canada, they'll be naming schools after him, and streets," Burke said.

Don't think Flames GM Brad Treliving hasn't given ending the drought some thought.

"Hey, that's all you dream about," he said, while attempting to keep the pressures of winning in Canada in perspective.

"You got to bed at night and it's no different than any other manager or any other person involved in the game: That's what you want to accomplish" Treliving said. "If you really put the energy and the effort into doing the right things, the results will come."

Having lost in the Final twice, Desjardins can't remember a sweeter moment than winning the Cup.

"It's a reward that's indescribable," Desjardins said. "When you win, you can share it. You share it with your teammates, you share it with the coaching staff."

In Canada, it will be shared with an entire nation.

____

AP Hockey Writer Stephen Whyno contributed.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

PITTSBURGH — Barry Trotz had questions when he took over the New York Islanders last summer. About the defense. About the goaltending. About where the scoring would come from if star John Tavares bailed in free agency.

One by one over the last 10 months, the Islanders have answered them all. The team that couldn't stop anyone a year ago is now the team that stops nearly everyone — Sidney Crosby and the Pittsburgh Penguins included.

Four games. Four wins, each one more impressive than the next, culminating in a typically gritty 3-1 victory in Game 4 on Tuesday night that finished off a stunning sweep of the Penguins and sent the Islanders into the second round of the playoffs for just the second time in 26 years.

"It's not like we came in and thought we were going to win it in four games," said New York goaltender Robin Lehner, who stopped 135 of the 141 shots he faced in the series, including 32 of 33 in the clincher. "But we felt confident coming in playing against these guys. We really did."

The Islanders trailed for less than five minutes across four games, responding every time Pittsburgh made a push. When Penguins forward Jake Guentzel scored 35 seconds into the first period to give Pittsburgh an early jolt, Eberle responded 1:34 later to tie the game. The Islanders never trailed again, taking the lead for good on Brock Nelson's third of the playoffs late in the first period. Josh Bailey flipped in an empty-netter with 38 seconds to go in the third.

"It's kind of been the staple," said Eberle, who had four goals in four games. "They score and we're able to respond in a timely fashion. Just a lot of commitment at the end of the game, some blocks, some huge sticks preventing and a big kill. That's the Islander way to win."

New York will face either Washington or Carolina in the second round. Trotz led the Capitals to the franchise's first Stanley Cup last spring but downplayed the idea of a rematch. At least for now.

"That's a special group that will always be a part of me," Trotz said. "But if we end up playing them, they're the opposition."

Pittsburgh began the playoffs looking for the franchise's third Stanley Cup in four years. The Penguins managed just six goals while getting swept in the opening round for the first time since 1972.

"It's a tough loss for us, but we have to learn," Pittsburgh forward Evgeni Malkin said. "Next year, we need to understand there are young guys, they're hungry. Every team tries to win. We're not champions anymore."

The Islanders hired Trotz last summer just days after he lifted the Cup with the Caps. He immediately began a makeover that put a premium on preventing goals rather than scoring them. New York signed Lehner to a one-year deal in the early days of free agency.

The 27-year-old used it as a chance to jump-start his career, teaming with Thomas Greiss to serve as the backbone of a club that allowed the fewest goals in the league during the regular season. Lehner then backed it up with 12-plus periods of sound hockey that left Pittsburgh baffled.

Penguins forward Patric Hornqvist's frustration briefly bubbled over in the second period. Tired of getting whacked at by Lehner, the fiery Swede started a shoving match that flirted with turning into a full-blown fight. While it briefly gave Pittsburgh a spark, it didn't translate to the scoreboard. Not much did for the Penguins, whose 13th straight playoff appearance lasted all of seven days.

"It boils down to critical moments, making the right plays at the right time," Pittsburgh coach Mike Sullivan said. "We didn't play as well as we're capable."

New York's system that forced the Penguins to go through layer upon layer of players certainly helped. The Islanders' forecheck flustered Pittsburgh early in the series, and the Penguins never really got comfortable.

"They're a team that's built on defense first and they've certainly bought into that and that's their identity," Sullivan said of the Islanders. "I think our identity is different based on the personnel that we have. Having said that, it's hard to win in the playoffs when you don't defend and you don't take care of the puck."

That problem popped up once again in the decider. Shortly after Guenztel's goal brought the 574th consecutive home sellout to its feet, Pittsburgh defenseman Kris Letang tried to pinch at the blue line to keep the puck in the New York zone. The puck hopped over his stick and went to Eberle, who finished off a 2-on-1 by ripping a shot by Murray's glove.

Just like that, the Islanders had the momentum again. And just like in Games 1-3, they didn't give it back.

A little bit of puck luck helped. Crosby hit the inside of the left post in the middle of the second period, and Islanders defenseman Scott Mayfield bailed out Lehner by making a save with his left leg on a point-blank shot by Phil Kessel early in the third.

And that was it. When Bailey's flip went the length of the ice and into the empty net, the Islanders' bench erupted and the Penguins trudged toward an offseason that could lead to significant changes.

NOTES: New York F Cal Clutterbuck and D Johnny Boychuck both left in the second period with injuries and did not return. ... Crosby's assist on Guentzel's goal moved him past Hall of Famer Steve Yzerman and into 10th place on the NHL's all-time playoff points list (186). ... Pittsburgh went 0 for 3 on the power play and finished 1 for 11 in the series with the man advantage.

UP NEXT

The Islanders face the winner of the series between the defending Stanley Cup champion Capitals and the Carolina Hurricanes. Washington leads 2-1.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

PITTSBURGH — Casey DeSmith has seen it at every stop of his hockey career. Practice comes, the focus shifts to defending and the guys paid lavishly to score goals take their foot off the gas.

"I've had people on every single team I've ever played on like that, obviously," the Pittsburgh Penguins goaltender said. "It just comes with the territory of being a gifted offensive player."

There is an exception. Then again, there almost always is when it comes to Sidney Crosby.

The Penguins captain — whose resume is stuffed with six 100-point seasons, a pair of scoring titles and two Hart Trophies as the NHL's Most Valuable Player — has long been respected and feared for his creative playmaking.

It's his leadership and conscientious approach to every aspect of the game while stewarding the Penguins through a rocky season to a 13th straight playoff berth that has put the 31-year-old into the conversation for the Selke Trophy, given annually to the NHL's top defensive forward.

Both the metrics and the eye test heading into Pittsburgh's first-round matchup with the New York Islanders provide a compelling case.

Crosby won more than 55% of his faceoffs this season, his best mark since 2009-10. He blocked 43 shots and took away the puck from an opponent 54 times, the second-highest total of his career. After a talk with coach Mike Sullivan last fall, Crosby occasionally found himself killing penalties, a role he embraced and would have happily kept doing if not for concerns over his workload.

Still, there are situations when Sullivan knows he needs the star he calls "the best 200-foot player in the game" to go do his thing. Nursing a one-goal lead late against Carolina on March 31, Sullivan sent Crosby over the boards over and over and over as the clock dwindled. Pittsburgh held the Hurricanes at bay and emerged with a crucial 3-1 win.

"He was out there three of the last five minutes, defending the six-on-five, defending the five-on-four," Sullivan said. "He was the one guy that was dominant in the faceoff circle. I thought his defensive effort was on display."

Hall of Famer Sergei Fedorov was the last player to capture the Selke while scoring 100 points, doing it for Detroit in 1996. Crosby has an outside shot at joining that exclusive company when the league awards are announced in June. Not that Crosby, who has never finished higher than seventh in Selke voting, seems to care.

"I'm still trying to figure it out, to be honest with you," Crosby said. "I think it's still something, you're trying to ingrain those habits and be in the right positions. I think experience helps that. You realize that it can help you offensively to be good defensively too. It's not as bad as sometimes you think it needs to be. I think that's part of it."

Or maybe more than a part of it.

Pittsburgh center Matt Cullen, at 42 the league's oldest player, has carved out a 21-year career due in large part to his defensive expertise. Around the time he hit 30, Cullen knew he needed to find different ways to contribute beyond trying to put the puck in the net if he wanted to stick around. He sees Crosby taking some of the same steps not out of necessity but by choice, which makes it all the more impressive.

"I think Sid's the best example of a guy that has that growth mindset as far as he's never completely satisfied with where he's at," Cullen said. "He's always evolving and learning and adapting to different situations."

Cullen likened Crosby to Michael Jordan, who was named to the NBA's All-Defensive team nine times in addition to winning 10 scoring titles and leading the Chicago Bulls to six championships.

"Sid's accepted all the challenges of playing against the top lines and then going out and scoring, too," Cullen said.

Forward Jared McCann arrived in a trade with Florida on Feb. 1. The 22-year-old grew up admiring Crosby from afar. The up-close look has been even more revealing. McCann will find himself transfixed on Crosby's No. 87 during film sessions, studying the subtle aspects of Crosby's play in Pittsburgh's end looking for tips that might translate to his own game, be it positioning, physicality or a sense on knowing where the puck is headed before it gets there.

"I kind of catch myself moving a little bit too much, kind of circling too much," McCann said. "I see him stop his feet and then read the play, see where it's going to go and then go. I feel like as a young player, as much as you can watch him in the defensive zone, you should learn from him."

Coach Peter Laviolette has spent more than a decade trying to find ways to deal with Crosby during stops in Carolina, Philadelphia and now Nashville, with only occasional success.

"Never once did it cross my mind to think maybe we could put somebody on the ice and take advantage of him," Laviolette said. "It's just that I think his offense overshadows (his defense) sometimes because he's an elite offensive player."

Which Sullivan believes separates Crosby from annual Selke contenders like Boston's Patrice Bergeron and Los Angeles' Anze Kopitar.

"He's the most dangerous guy with the puck," Sullivan said. "He also has the ability to score goals at the other end of the rink in quick strike better than any of the other players in conversation."

Opportunities that typically begin with Crosby in the defensive zone, doing the dirty work others won't in an effort to produce the highlights few can.

"His ability to win faceoffs, his puck protection, his strength on the puck, his ability to control the game, all of those things, as important as they are on the offensive side of the puck, they're just as important on the defensive side," Predators defenseman PK Subban said.

"When he decides, he's going to come back into the zone, get the puck and take it out of the zone, he's going to do it."

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

ESPOO, Finland — The International Ice Hockey Federation offered an explanation Monday for the decision to waive off what would have been the gold medal-winning goal by Finland in the host country's shootout loss to the United States in the women's world hockey championship game.

The IIHF, which had a video judge review every goal during the tournament, cited two rules in saying the goal by Petra Nieminen at 11:33 of overtime was disallowed due to non-incidental goaltender interference.

Nieminen's goal sparked a wild celebration on Sunday as jubilant fans cheered what would have been Finland's first championship in its first appearance in the title game.

After a lengthy video review, the goal was called back.

Finland captain Jenni Hiirikoski had made contact with American goaltender Alex Rigsby, who was moving out of her crease, as she passed in front of the net. Hiirikoski wasn't assessed a goaltender interference penalty, but Rigsby was given a tripping minor.

The IIHF said the video judge weighed two rules in making the decision to waive off the goal.

One states: "An attacking skater who makes contact other than incidental with a goaltender who is out of his goal crease during game action will be assessed a minor penalty for interference. If a goal is scored at this time, it will not count." The other states: "Incidental contact is allowed when the goaltender is in the act of playing the puck outside his goal crease, provided the attacking skater makes a reasonable effort to minimize or avoid such contact."

Once the goal was waived off, the referees decided to uphold the tripping penalty. The Americans killed off two penalties in overtime before winning the game in a shootout as dispirited fans watched their devastated team await their runner-up honors.

Finnish Ice Hockey Federation chief executive officer Matti Nurminen said referees planned to give a penalty to Rigsby for tripping and were allowing the goal.

"But when it goes to video review, the power and authority goes (to) the video-goal judges," he said after the game. "They saw it as goalie interference and made that decision."

Hiirikoski did not think she had illegally interfered with the American.

"She came out from her crease," she said. "What can you do? We don't make the decisions."

Rigsby saw it a different way: "I knew right away that it was not a goal. I was trying to ask the ref how I got a penalty, considering I was the one who got body-slammed. But the ref thinks I tried tripping the player when I was on the ground, and somehow I end up with the penalty. Funny how that went."

Finland coach Pasi Mustonen said the play was simple: it was either a penalty on Hiirikoski for goalie interference and no goal or a penalty on Rigsby and a goal by Nieminen. He said he received no explanation from officials about the decision.

"They never come to me. They are ordered not to talk," Mustonen said after the game. "They never can communicate, which means they destroy the atmosphere between the referees and the teams. They don't really have the self-confidence that is needed to communicate with people in this atmosphere and that is the problem, which is also a matter of competence. We need male referees. All the female referees that are mature enough to be here, naturally, they should be here, but there are so few in the world."

In Toronto, Finnish forward Kasperi Kapanen of the Maple Leafs said the call was botched.

"I think they kind of messed it up ... that's what happens. It is what it is," he told The Canadian Press. "It would have been nice for them to win. It would have been good for women's hockey, and just our country in general."

Kapanen wasn't the only one confused by the call.

Former American women's team captain Julie Chu tweeted, "What is going onnnnn? If it's not a goal, then Finland should have a penalty for goalie interference. If it's a goal, then it means USA tripped Finland and the Finnish goal is good...? If it's no goal, then how does USA have penalty? Someone help me??"

Former Canadian captain Hayley Wickenheiser tweeted: "That. Was. A. Goal. #suomi."

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Tal Pinchevsky

RIMOUSKI, Quebec — The walls inside Sun Life Financial Coliseum in this eastern Quebec town along the Saint Lawrence River are swathed in tributes to the history of the Rimouski Oceanic, which entered the competitive ranks of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League in 1995.

There are homages to former players like Vincent Lecavalier and Brad Richards, who in 2000 led the club to its only Memorial Cup, Canadian junior hockey’s ultimate prize. Naturally, there is plenty of space dedicated to Sidney Crosby, the superstar who played two seasons in Rimouski.

There’s a new player causing a stir among the locals — 17-year-old Alexis Lafrenière — and he will not even be eligible for the N.H.L. draft until 2020.

With a remarkable season and a standout international career, Lafrenière has been drawing comparisons to Crosby, whose talent belied his age 15 years ago before being drafted first over all by the Pittsburgh Penguins.

A native of Saint Eustache, Quebec, a suburb just west of Montreal, Lafrenière dismisses such comparisons. But in a proud province whose die-hard hockey fans have waited some time for the next French Canadian superstar, he has been forced to contend with some lofty expectations.

“He played in Rimouski, and I did too. That’s something people say,” Lafrenière said. “But I’m not Crosby. I just try to be myself and play my game. If I can watch Crosby play and do things like he do, for sure I will do it to try to get better, but I don’t think I’m Crosby.”

Like Crosby, Lafrenière was selected first over all by Rimouski in the Q.M.J.H.L. draft. And like Crosby, Lafrenière dominated the league at 16, being named the league’s top rookie last season as well as a first-team All-Star. His 42 goals last season were the most for a 16-year-old in the league since Crosby in 2003-4.

In February, Lafrenière went on a 12-game tear in which he collected eight goals and 23 points, the highest single-month point total in his junior hockey career. He finished the regular season last weekend with 105 points, tied for second in the league, behind only Rouyn-Noranda forward Peter Abbandonato, a player almost three and a half years Lafrenière’s senior.

“We haven’t felt this kind of response since Sidney,” the Oceanic owner Alex Tanguay said. “It’s a different kind of response, obviously with the social media and stuff, but you can definitely feel a vibe around him. Back then, if you wanted to see Sid play, you needed to drive down to Rimouski.

“Now in 2019, you can know what type of player Alexis is just by watching him on the internet or on TV. I guess it’s a different kind of response, but in a way the same vibe we felt almost 15 years ago.”

Any dominant 16-year-old hockey player naturally draws comparisons to Crosby, one of Canada’s most fabled native sons. But Lafrenière’s dominance has not been confined to the league colloquially known as the Q.

At the 2018 Hlinka-Gretzky Cup, the top international tournament for players 17 and younger, Lafrenière tied for the scoring lead despite being the second-youngest player on his team. He sealed Canada’s tournament victory with two goals, including the winner, in the final against Sweden.

In December and January, he was the youngest player to compete at the International Ice Hockey Federation world junior championship, for players 20 and younger. In part because of injuries to other players, Lafrenière became the ninth youngest to compete for Canada at the annual holiday tournament, behind names like Wayne Gretzky, Connor McDavid, Eric Lindros and, of course, Crosby.

But Lafrenière’s world junior showcase was not exactly a grand coronation. Canada, the host nation, lost in the quarterfinal to Finland, the eventual champion. After a third-period benching against Switzerland in group play, Lafrenière encountered the first real adversity of his young career. He responded with a goal against the Czech Republic in the next game.

“This goal was probably one of the biggest of my career in front of so much people,” he said. “At World Juniors, scoring a goal is really special.”

The Rimouski coach and general manager, Serge Beausoleil, added: “In many ways, it helped him. It’s one of the first times that he faced adversity. He has to react to that. That’s really good for him. He’s a tremendous player, but he has room for improvement.”

Aside from their biographical similarities, Lafrenière and Crosby differ drastically in style. Whereas Crosby’s legend was built on subtlety and the facility with which he makes the extraordinary appear ordinary, Lafrenière is more the showman. He appears most in his element driving offensive play with the puck on his stick. It’s a style he adopted as a child emulating his favorite player, the Chicago Blackhawks star Patrick Kane.

A fastidious student of the game, Lafrenière can still describe a personal favorite pass from Kane to then-teammate Marian Hossa.

“The pass to Hossa,” he recalled. “He spin around and back door. That was pretty sick.”

Lafrenière is expected to be a prominent player in next season’s world junior tournament in the Czech Republic. By then, every game he plays will draw the kind of scrutiny reserved for a player expected to go No. 1 in the N.H.L. draft.

The last Quebecois player selected first over all was goaltender Marc-Andre Fleury in 2003. The last nongoalie from Quebec to go first was Lecavalier in 1998. That’s a startling drought for a province known as the proving ground for icons like Maurice Richard, Jean Beliveau, Gilbert Perreault, Guy Lafleur, Mario Lemieux, Ray Bourque and Patrick Roy.

Lafrenière would be thrilled to bring Quebec back to the top of the N.H.L. draft board.

“Just to be drafted is a dream,” he said. “If I had the chance to go first over all, that would be something really special.”

But with plenty of hockey to play before the 2020 N.H.L. draft, Rimouski’s lively fans are looking forward to a few more indelible moments with their young superstar. Lafrenière’s agent announced in February that he would return to the Oceanic for the 2019-20 season after reports that he had been approached by professional clubs in Europe.

“He’s our best player at 17 years old,” Beausoleil said. “At times, we’re really demanding because we love him. It’s good to see that he has something to learn. That’s a long process.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Curtis Rush

TORONTO — The Maple Leafs superstars John Tavares and Auston Matthews have been as good as advertised this season, and often even better.

But Mitch Marner, who came to this championship-starved city with high expectations after he was chosen with the No. 4 overall pick in 2015, has had a breakout year and made a case that he’s the most valuable Maple Leafs forward.

Marner, a 21-year-old winger, led Toronto in points this season and became the youngest player in Maple Leafs history to record 90 points, the first to hit that benchmark in 22 years.

Marner finished 11th in the N.H.L. with 94 points (26 goals and 68 assists), six points ahead of Tavares and 21 ahead of Matthews, who missed 14 games because of injury. Marner and Tavares play on the same line, and Marner was a key reason Tavares, in his first season in Toronto, had a career-high 47 goals this season.

[N.H.L. playoffs: first-round schedule and results]

Tavares, Matthews and Marner, along with goaltender Frederik Andersen, will need to be at their best as the Maple Leafs seek postseason redemption against the Boston Bruins, their first-round opponent for the second straight season. Their best-of-seven series starts Thursday in Boston.

The wounds remain fresh from last spring’s opening round, when Toronto coughed up a 4-3 second-period lead and lost, 7-4, in a shocking conclusion to Game 7.

But last season the Leafs didn’t have Tavares, the longtime Islanders star. His signing to a seven-year, $77 million contract as a free agent last summer created hope in a city long accustomed to hockey failure. The Leafs haven’t won the Stanley Cup since 1967 and haven’t won a playoff series since 2004.

Although Marner can’t match Tavares or Matthews in goal-scoring ability, he has wowed everyone with his vision.

“The one thing about Marner,” Tampa Bay Lightning Coach Jon Cooper said, “is he is as smart a player as this league has not only seen this year, but has ever seen.”

Marner attributes his creativity to playing multiple sports as a youth. Soccer helped develop his footwork, and lacrosse was important in developing his hands and mobility around the goal area.

“Both soccer and lacrosse are creative in their own ways,” Marner said. “In soccer, I was a midfielder so I did a lot of the running up and down the field, and lacrosse-wise I think it helped with the hands a lot. It’s a different kind of motion in lacrosse for trying to get around guys, so I think that helped as well.”

Born in Markham, Ontario, north of Toronto, Marner evokes comparisons to Patrick Kane and Johnny Gaudreau, other elusive, flashy stickhandlers. But in these parts, the 6-foot, 175 pound Marner is more reminiscent of Doug Gilmour, another smallish Maple Leafs forward who brought a heart and joy to the game.

“He’s skilled, explosive and wants the puck and sees the ice so well,” said Gilmour, who believes Marner will someday break his franchise record for assists in a season, 95.

Tavares said Marner has talked to him on the bench about the patterns he saw opponents employing.

“He just reads the game so well, not just with the puck, but without it, that he’s able anticipate plays,” Tavares, 28, said.

Whether it’s because of his peach-fuzz cheeks or lack of size, Marner was often overlooked as he developed. But one person has championed those skills from the start: his father, Paul.

When Mitch was 4, his father phoned the hockey skills coach Rob Desveaux to see if he could give the boy private lessons as he had with Tyler Seguin, now with the Dallas Stars.

Desveaux, who runs 3 Zones Hockey School northeast of Toronto, turned Marner down, saying he started training players at age 6.

Paul Marner called a week later, and Desveaux stood firm. A couple of weeks later, Paul called again.

“Oh, my God, this guy,” Desveaux remembered thinking to himself.

When Mitch and his father arrived, Desveaux was in for another shock.

“Oh, my God, he’s tiny,” Desveaux said.

“Yeah, but watch him,” Paul pleaded.

Mitch flew around the ice once, and the skills coach turned to Paul and said: “O.K., he’s in.”

Desveaux has been Marner’s on-ice skills coach ever since.

Marner exudes a boyish charm and sense of warmth that has made him a fan favorite across the league. He has been seen singing along to Bon Jovi on the bench.

On Feb. 14, during the pregame warm-up in Las Vegas, a young girl in a Leafs jersey held up a sign at ice level. “Hey Mitch. Be My Valentine,” the sign read.

Marner skated over to shrieks of delight from the young girl, and he posed for pictures.

In early March, Marner celebrated the seventh birthday of Hayden Foulon, who has been battling leukemia, by giving tickets to her and her family.

Marner, who met Hayden in 2015 when he was a forward with the O.H.L.’s London Knights, also gave her a necklace with a heart-shaped locket with room for a photo of both of them.

“She is my hero,” Marner said. “She means a lot to me and my family.”

Marner’s rise to hockey’s highest level has not been without bumps, despite early signs of great potential.

In 2013, Marner entered the O.H.L. draft listed at 5-7 and only 130 pounds. He slid all the way to No. 19, amid concerns about his size and durability, a theme throughout his hockey career.

And in the 2015 N.H.L. draft, the Leafs considered taking defenseman Noah Hanifin with their No. 4 overall pick until they settled on Marner. He was sent back to juniors in the 2015-16 season and didn’t crack the Maple Leafs roster until 2016-17. Then, early in his second season, Babcock demoted Marner to the fourth line for a time because the coach was unhappy with Marner’s defensive play.

Marner used the experience to get stronger in the off-season with his longtime off-ice performance coach Dan Noble.

To boost power in his legs so he could bounce off opponents with acceleration, Noble fitted Marner with a water vest. During squats, the water moves around, creating an imbalance that mimics hockey players’ dynamic movements.

“We call it bulletproofing his hips,” Noble said.

Marner is eligible to become a restricted free agent this summer, and many, including former Maple Leafs General Manager Brian Burke, believe he can command the kind of money Tavares and Matthews make at around $11 million a season, although such a rich deal would add to the club’s salary-cap challenges.

“He’s their most exciting player,” said Burke, now a television analyst. “I love Auston Matthews, but he ain’t selling tickets. He ain’t exciting. Mitch Marner is exciting.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Marc Tracy, Karen Crouse and Matthew Futterman

They work just as hard as men for less pay.

When they complain, they are told they need to generate as much money as men do if they want to get paid as much as men are paid. When they say that’s essentially impossible without more opportunities and promotion, they are told opportunity and promotion will happen once they start producing more money.

This is the narrative at the heart of the gender discrimination lawsuit the United States women’s national soccer team filed on Friday against U.S. Soccer, but in nearly every sport, gender disparities in pay and working conditions are rampant.

Coming just three months before the start of the Women’s World Cup, the litigation immediately became the central plotline for the event and brought to the fore an issue that has increasingly rankled the sports world.

[Eight times women in sports fought for equality.]

In golf last year, the world’s top-ranked woman earned as much as the 33rd-best man. The United States women’s hockey team expected to have a victory tour after winning gold at the Pyeongchang Olympics last year. It didn’t happen. The N.B.A. minimum salary of $1.35 million for a player with one year of experience is higher than the salary cap for an entire W.N.B.A. roster.

“Unless the origin of the sport is anchored in women, like gymnastics or field hockey, I don’t think there’s a culture that starts with the premise: Women are going to be treated equally, or, we’re going to make up for the historical discrimination against women and make sure we’re going where we need to go,” said Donna Lopiano, a sports management consultant and former University of Texas athletics administrator, referring to both the national governing boards and to college sports.

According to the national women’s team’s suit against U.S. Soccer, differing systems of compensation for the men’s and women’s teams have led to the women repeatedly earning less than their male counterparts, even though the women are defending champions and the men failed to qualify for the 2018 World Cup.

Supporters of women’s sports praised the soccer team on Friday for taking a stand and trying to force the powers that be to address its complaints.

“College sports has a great statute called Title IX,” said Nancy Hogshead-Makar, the chief executive of the advocacy group Champion Women.

“What it takes, though,” she added, “is 18- to 22-year-olds speaking up, because the adults in the room have abdicated that role of ensuring gender equity.”

Title IX — the 1972 landmark federal law mandating gender equity in higher education, including college sports — is nearly 50 years old. But advocates say that many universities fall short of the statute’s requirement that athletic opportunities must correlate with the overall student population. Both the college sports establishment and the federal government have evinced little interest in enforcing that requirement strictly.

Advocates say that the N.C.A.A. and its members have not sufficiently prioritized increasing funding for women’s sports.

“If sports are being dropped, the money isn’t going to women’s sports — it’s going to the arms race in football and men’s basketball,” Lopiano said. “The culture is football and men’s basketball first. Boys first. Women are still at the back of the bus.”

Amy Wilson, the N.C.A.A. managing director of inclusion, said the N.C.A.A.’s member colleges, which create most policy, had no plans to further enforce Title IX to make up for the federal government’s failure to act.

“The thinking is, we’re here to run an organization with rules for our sports,” Wilson said.

A major challenge for female athletes has been to come up with a response to the argument that women deserve less money because their sports produce less money.

Andrew Zimbalist, a sports economist at Smith College, said that those who cling to a free-market argument fail to note the artificial advantages that men’s sports have long enjoyed. Men in the major team sports play in leagues that are monopolies, and have benefited from tens of millions of dollars in public subsidies that have helped finance and promote their endeavors.

“While the revenue disparity is a major component of this, it’s partly a result of the lack of promotion women have received,” Zimbalist said. “There is a lot of historical and cultural baggage to all of this.”

For all the gains that women have made in golf — the increase in playing opportunities in college and the integration of formerly all-male private clubs — the disparity in purses between the women of the L.P.G.A. Tour and the men of the PGA Tour continues to be striking.

In 2018, the women’s leading money winner, Ariya Jutanugarn, won three events, including the United States Women’s Open, and posted 17 top-10 finishes in 28 starts. Her on-course earnings of $2,743,949 were surpassed by 33 players on the PGA Tour, led by Justin Thomas’s $8,694,821. Chesson Hadley, who ranked 33rd, did not record a victory and had seven top-10s in 30 starts on his way to $2,768,863. (The 33rd-ranked L.P.G.A. player, by comparison, earned $626,263.)

In 2016, the L.P.G.A. and PGA Tour formed a partnership with the stated aim of creating joint marketing programs and events and coordinating schedules. The alliance apparently does not cover certain fees that fall under the T.P.C. Network, which is part of the PGA Tour.

Brittany Lincicome, a two-time major champion, said that when she chooses to practice at T.P.C. Tampa Bay near her home she is required to pay cart fees. Card-carrying members of the PGA Tour incur no such fees.

What bothers Lincicome is not the fee per se, “but the principle of it,” she said. “I’m a well-known L.P.G.A. player.”

Two years ago, the future looked brighter for the United States women’s hockey team. Like the women’s soccer team, the hockey players were dominant in their sport internationally and far exceeded the achievements of the men’s national team.

After threatening to boycott the world championship tournament in 2017 in Plymouth Township, Mich., amid contract negotiations with U.S.A. Hockey for a living wage and more playing opportunities, the women’s team reached a deal that paid each player about $71,000 annually. That was a vast increase over the less than $10,000 that some of them had been making. The deal also provided the female players with travel and insurance provisions that equaled what the men’s national team received.

But the support for girls and women’s hockey that U.S.A. Hockey also promised then has been slow to develop. There are no women on U.S.A. Hockey’s marketing council. The Women’s High Performance Advisory Group, which was created in the 2017 deal, has only recently begun to have meaningful dialogue.

After earning the gold medal at the 2018 Olympics with a dramatic shootout victory over Canada, its archrival, the women’s team embarked on a weeklong national media tour, visiting talk shows and N.H.L. games. But its post-Olympic exhibition tour never materialized. And there are currently no women’s player jerseys or jerseys in women’s sizes available at U.S.A. Hockey’s online stores.

“From a marketing standpoint, is it a huge missed opportunity?” Hilary Knight, the team’s star forward, said late last year. “Probably. We sort of disappeared from the summer.”

In tennis, women have pulled closer to pay equality than in any other major sport, with equal pay on the sport’s biggest stages. Tennis players routinely dominate lists of the highest-paid female athletes. But a closer look at the scoreboard each year would still show, “Advantage: Men.”

The four Grand Slam events and three other large tournaments — Indian Wells, Calif.; the Miami Open; and the Madrid Open — offer equal prize money to men and women, but women in the top 100 generally make only about 80 percent of the prize money their male counterparts make, because of lower pay at other tournaments.

At the Australian Open, Serena Williams spoke of how she talks often about equality on the different boards she sits on outside the sport. “Bringing that into tennis, as well, is something that’s superimportant. The only way to do it is to talk about it and to be open about it, have these conversations that aren’t necessarily comfortable.”

The biggest unresolved question in terms of how women are compensated for playing basketball right now is in the W.N.B.A., where the league and the players’ union are engaged in negotiations over a new collective bargaining agreement.

Erin Kane, an agent with Octagon who represents Kristi Toliver, Elena Delle Donne and other W.N.B.A. players, said players were largely satisfied with how U.S.A. Basketball treated them.

“What the U.S.W.N.T. is doing is timely and inspiring,” Kane said of the soccer lawsuit. “When it comes to money, change is always a fight.”

W.N.B.A. players, many of whom play overseas in their off-season to earn more money, are pushing for quality training resources that are consistent across the league and on a par with the N.B.A.

Adam Silver, the N.B.A. commissioner, said the league’s compensation system is dependent on its revenues. “We want nothing more than for W.N.B.A. players to receive the recognition they deserve for being world-class athletes,” he said. “And as we work with the W.N.B.P.A. to improve the economics of the league, we also challenge the broader basketball and sports community to support the W.N.B.A. and its athletes.”

Chiney Ogwumike, a member of the union’s executive committee, said that for too long W.N.B.A. players have been told to be grateful for what they have.

“Our goal is to educate people to respect the fact that we too are the best of the best at what we do,” she said.

Seth Berkman, Ben Rothenberg and Howard Megdal contributed reporting.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Frank Litsky

Ted Lindsay, a Hall of Fame player who packed a fierce combativeness in a slight frame as he helped the Detroit Red Wings win four Stanley Cup championship titles, died on Monday at his home in Oakland Township, Mich. He was 93.

Lew LaPaugh, a son-in-law and the president of the Ted Lindsay Foundation, which raises money for autism research, confirmed the death.

Lindsay, nicknamed Terrible Ted, played 17 seasons in the National Hockey League, 14 of them with the Red Wings, coming out of retirement for the final one. He was the first N.H.L. player to play 1,000 games, a first-team All Star eight times and a participant in 11 All-Star games. The Red Wings named him their captain.

Lindsay could be scrappy off the ice as well. In the mid-1950s he led an initially unsuccessful effort to create a players’ union, for which he paid a price.

In Detroit, Lindsay is revered as part of a celebrated triumvirate, the Production Line, in which he played left wing alongside Gordie Howe at right wing and Sid Abel at center. He was the last surviving member of that trio.

All three were elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame, Lindsay in 1966, a year after his final retirement, when the three-year waiting period for eligibility was waived. And all three are remembered at the Red Wings’ new home, the Little Caesars Arena (as they were at the team’s previous home, Joe Louis Arena), where oversize jerseys hang from the rafters bearing their retired numbers — Howe’s 9, Abel’s 12 and Lindsay’s 7.

In 1950, Lindsay won the Art Ross Trophy as the league’s scoring champion; Abel finished second and Howe third. In all, in 1,068 regular-season games, Lindsay recorded 379 goals and 472 assists for 851 points, making him at the time the highest-scoring left wing.

A battler on the ice, perhaps to compensate for his size — 5-foot-8 and about 165 pounds — he was heavily penalized, too. He spent 1,808 minutes in the penalty box, the equivalent of 30 games.

“I was born a poor loser,” he told The New York Times in 1973, explaining his feistiness. “I wouldn’t talk to anyone who wasn’t on my team.”

Bill Chadwick, a Hall of Fame referee, spent many nights trying to keep Lindsay under control. “Ted was a mean hockey player,” Chadwick once said, “but he was the kind of guy I would have wanted to play for me. He’d do anything to get the puck in the net.”

Robert Blake Theodore Lindsay was born on July 29, 1925, in Renfrew, Ontario, the home of one of professional hockey’s premiere teams in its early years, the Renfrew Millionaires. Ted’s father, Bert, was a star goaltender for the team and played as well in the early N.H.L. His mother, Maude (Villemarie) Lindsay, was a homemaker.

In 1929, with the onset of the Depression, the family moved to Kirkland Lake, Ontario, where Bert Lindsay worked in the gold mines and where Ted grew up.

After two years in junior hockey, he joined the Red Wings at 19 in 1944 and remained with them until 1957. That was the year Lindsay led a group that tried to establish a players’ union.

Lindsay took his plans to Jimmy Hoffa, the Teamsters union boss, who told him that professional athletes did not need a union. Jack Adams, the Red Wings’ longtime general manager, had another response: He traded Lindsay to the Chicago Blackhawks.

Lindsay recalled that in his first game against his old team, he smacked Howe over the head. Howe remembered, too. “I laid him out,” Howe said. “Then I asked him if this was the way he wanted to play.”

Lindsay got up off the ice, he said, and replied, “No, I guess it’s not worth breaking up a friendship.”

After the Lindsay trade, the new N.H.L. Players’ Association filed a $3 million federal antitrust suit, calling the league a dictatorship. Four months later, in February 1958, the players dropped the suit and plans for a union when the club owners agreed to a $7,000 salary minimum and a 60-percent increase in pension benefits.

The players now have a union, the National Hockey League Players’ Association, and the average salary is about $3 million a year.

Lindsay played three seasons in Chicago (1957-60), retired for four seasons and returned to Detroit for one more, 1964-65.

During his time in Detroit, the Red Wings won the Stanley Cup in 1950, defeating the Rangers, 4 games to 3; in 1952, sweeping the Montreal Canadiens, 4-0; and in 1954 and 1955, beating the Canadiens each time, 4-3. In 133 playoff games, Lindsay had 47 goals and 49 assists for 96 points.

He later became general manager of the Red Wings (1977-80) and coached them for nine games in the 1979-80 season and 20 games in 1980-81. His coaching record was 5-21-3.

In later years, Lindsay was a television hockey analyst and a manufacturer’s representative.

He is survived by a son, Blake; two daughters, Lynn Lindsay LaPaugh and Meredith Berman; a stepdaughter, Leslie Richardson; six grandchildren; and three great-grandchildren.

In their playing heyday, Lindsay, Howe and Abel were good friends as well as Production Line teammates. “There was a place we used to meet for drinks after a workout or a game,” Abel, who died in 2000, once said.

Howe saw them as the quintessence of teamwork. “They used to say that if you blindfolded us, we’d still be able to find one another,” he said. “All of us knew where everyone else was at any given moment. Maybe the closeness off the ice had something to do with it.”

Frank Litsky, a longtime sportswriter for The Times, died in October. Daniel E. Slotnik contributed reporting.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Salim Valji

MONTREAL — Fred Sasakamoose thought this day would never come.

Sasakamoose, the N.H.L.’s first Indigenous player when he skated in 11 games with the Chicago Black Hawks during the 1953-54 season, watched from the Ahtahkakoop Cree Nation in northern Saskatchewan on Sunday night as the Montreal Canadiens battled the Carolina Hurricanes — and heard his own language.

It was the first N.H.L. broadcast in Plains Cree, the Algonquian language he grew up speaking.

“It makes me so proud that they’re going to broadcast the game in my language,” he said in a telephone interview before the game.

“I heard people broadcast local tournaments, the Indian Stanley Cup they call them. This evening I am going to listen to the game and understand, because I’m a Cree Indian.”

Sunday’s production was born out of discussions between Sportsnet, the league’s Canadian national TV rights holder, and the Aboriginal Peoples Television Network, a Canadian cable channel dedicated to promoting the country’s Indigenous heritage.

Community leaders approached Sportsnet last year, wanting to continue the work done at the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver, British Columbia, where A.P.T.N. aired 10 hours a day of coverage in a mix of Indigenous, French and English languages.

“As a group, we discussed how to use hockey and tie it in with the Cree language,” said Rob Corte, Sportsnet’s vice president of N.H.L. production. “It was a very informative, interesting and emotional meeting, and we left there thinking that we wanted to do something.”

The broadcasters Clarence Iron, Earl Wood, Jason Chamakese and John Chabot, an eight-year N.H.L. veteran and former assistant coach with the Islanders, called the game from the A.P.T.N. studios in Winnipeg, Manitoba, via a live feed provided by Sportsnet.

“It’s very monumental in that a lot of our people struggle on an everyday basis because of their disconnection from their everyday self,” said Wood, who hosted the studio show. “A lot of our young people are shy about speaking the language. If they hear it on the mainstream media, we can use this to our advantage for the retention of our language.”

One of the biggest challenges for the broadcast team was finding words in Plains Cree that describe the in-game hockey events and projecting them quickly enough during the real-time action.

The commentators built their vocabulary during the 2010 Olympics, when A.P.T.N. covered hockey in Cree. They developed words by talking with community elders and Plains Cree speakers.

“The puck itself, we call it napakiwānis, which is something that is pressed down,” Iron said.

Other terms like kocīw (he shoots), osīhēw pīhtokwahēw (he scores), kipahwāw (penalty), and tako (overtime) translate more directly from English.

The game also served as a showcase for the league’s most prominent Indigenous player, Montreal Canadiens goalie Carey Price, whose mother is a former chief of the Ulkatcho First Nation in northern British Columbia. During a stellar career that has seen him become the Canadiens’ franchise leader in wins, Price has supported Indigenous youth by hosting them at games.

“I feel like this game is meant for everybody,” Price said this month after winning his 315th career game to pass Jacques Plante for first place in franchise history. “It’s obviously a league motto, but I definitely have seen that first hand. I think it’s important that you need to be proud of where you come from and enjoy the game for what it is.”

Lining up opposite Price on Sunday was Hurricanes forward Micheal Ferland, who is Cree. The Hurricanes won, 2-1, in overtime.

The trailblazing Sasakamoose acknowledged the hardships that Indigenous Canadians still face, including significantly higher rates of suicide and alcoholism. Nights like Sunday, with Indigenous ice hockey stars showcased on national television in their own language, have the potential to inspire youth and make them proud of the heritage, he added.

Sasakamoose spent years at one of Canada’s notorious residential schools, a government-supported program that for a century sought to assimilate Indigenous children by separating them from their families and often forbidding them from speaking their Native languages.

“This is going to create opportunities for young people,” he said. “They’re going to change the world for our young people by giving them that chance, that someday they too could be the same as the Micheal Ferlands on TV.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Richard Goldstein

Andy Hebenton, who never missed a game during eight seasons with the New York Rangers and a final season with the Boston Bruins in setting a record at the time of 630 consecutive National Hockey League appearances, died on Tuesday in Gresham, Ore. He was 89.

His death, at an assisted living facility near Portland, was confirmed by his son Clay, who said he had congestive heart failure.

Hebenton was only 5 feet 9 inches and 180 pounds or so but was essentially indestructible, playing on right wing in the old six-team N.H.L. during the 1950s and ’60s, when players had yet to wear helmets and brawls were common.

He appeared in 216 straight games in the minors before the Rangers obtained him in 1955 and, coincidentally, another 216 consecutive games in the minor leagues after the Bruins released him in 1964.

Hebenton’s streak of 1,062 consecutive professional games, in both the minor and major leagues, ended in the 1967-68 season, when he left the Portland Buckaroos of the Western Hockey League to attend the funeral of his father, Robert, in Winnipeg, Manitoba.

Hebenton eclipsed the N.H.L. record of 580 consecutive games played, set by Johnny Wilson, a wing, who skated for four teams. Doug Jarvis is now No. 1 on the ironman list, having appeared in 964 straight games with three teams in the 1970s and ′80s.

Hebenton’s closest call to missing an N.H.L. game came in the 1956-57 season, when he won the league’s Lady Byng Memorial Trophy for gentlemanly play combined with exceptional talent.

In a game at the old Madison Square Garden, he was poked in the eye with a stick, causing the lid to puff up.

“It shut so tight I couldn’t see at all,” Hebenton told Sports Illustrated in 1967. “But somehow our club doctor managed to squeeze drops of some kind into it the next night in Montreal. The eye opened up a little, just enough so that I could get into the game.”

Hebenton was among the top 10 goal-scorers three times during his N.H.L. career. His highest point total came in the 1958-59 season when he scored 33 goals and had 29 assists, No. 3 on the Rangers in total points behind the future Hall of Fame wing Andy Bathgate and center Red Sullivan. He played in the 1960 N.H.L. All-Star Game.

But, as he told it, he wasn’t especially a home-crowd favorite; many Ranger fans, he said, felt he wasn’t tough enough. He incurred only 80 penalty minutes as a Ranger and appeared six times among the top five in balloting for the Lady Byng award.

When Hebenton lost seven teeth on the ice in a two-week period in January 1961, The New York Times took notice with an article headlined “Hebenton Puts Teeth in His Game: Quiet Ranger Is Still Not Angry after Losing Seven.”

Hebenton figured that the fans would finally be satisfied.

“I got my teeth knocked out, so now they should have no complaints,” he told The Times. “I admire guys who are tough and mean, and maybe I’d get more recognition if I was a mean guy. But when you go around knocking everybody down, you’re too tired to put a puck in the net. I was hired to score goals, not to sit in the penalty box.”

Andrew Alexander Hebenton was born on Oct. 3, 1929, in Winnipeg. He received his first pair of skates when he was 5 and tried them out in a backyard rink built by his father, a city Parks Department worker.

He was obtained by the Rangers after playing in the Pacific Coast Hockey League and the Western Hockey League.

Hebenton finished second to Glenn Hall, the Detroit Red Wings’ goalie and a future Hall of Famer, in the balloting for the 1955-1956 Calder Cup as the N.H.L. rookie of the year; he had scored 24 goals with 14 assists.

His most memorable goal came during the first overtime in Game 2 of the Rangers-Montreal Canadiens Stanley Cup semifinals in 1957. Skating along the right boards, he put a 15-foot shot past goalie Jacques Plante to give the Rangers a 4-3 victory. But the Canadiens captured the series, 4 games to 1, and won the Stanley Cup, defeating the Bruins in the finals.

The Rangers reached the playoffs four times during Hebenton’s years with them, but never made it to the championship round.

The Bruins selected Hebenton for a fee of $20,000 in the N.H.L. draft after the 1962-63 season. He scored 12 goals in his only season with them. He was then sent to the minors and never returned to the N.H.L., playing mostly in the Western Hockey League for Portland and the Victoria Maple Leafs before retiring at 45.

He later owned a cement contracting business in the Portland area.

In addition to his son Clay, who was a goalie with the Phoenix Roadrunners of the World Hockey Association for two seasons in the 1970s, Hebenton is survived by another son, Tim; three daughters, Melanie Walker, Karen Hebenton and Terry Fisher; eight grandchildren; and four great-grandchildren. His wife, Gael (Beveridge) Hebenton, died in 2014.

In describing how he didn’t satisfy the blood lust of some Ranger fans, Hebenton told The Times that he had showed grit going back to childhood.

“I was knocked down by a bus when I was 4 and hit in the head with a baseball bat when I was 6,” he said. “Now what is there to be scared about in a hockey game?”

An earlier version of this obituary, using information from Hebenton’s family, misstated the number of grandchildren and great-grandchildren who survive him. It is eight and four, not five and two. It also misspelled the given name of his wife. It is Gael, not Gail.

An earlier version of a picture caption with this obituary misstated the surname of a former Rangers star pictured with Hebenton and others. As the obituary correctly states, he was Andy Bathgate, not Bathpage.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. — A scoreboard that marked the U.S. men's ice hockey team's victory against the Soviet Union at the 1980 Winter Olympics has found a new home in Colorado Springs.

The Gazette reported Wednesday that the panel that kept score of the game that became known as the "Miracle on Ice" will be permanently displayed in the U.S. Olympic Museum and Hall of Fame, which is expected to open next year.

The scoreboard was decommissioned in 2017 after nearly four decades of service at the Herb Brooks Arena in Lake Placid, New York.

The museum's interim chief operating officer, Peter Maiurro, says the 850-pound (385-kilogram) panel will be mounted and powered in the museum's special events space.

___

Information from: The Gazette, http://www.gazette.com

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Annie Karni

WASHINGTON — A strange dynamic has gripped the Federal Trade Commission: President Trump’s biggest allies are the Democrats.

In a vote made public Wednesday, the commission’s two Democratic appointees voted to impose financial penalties on companies the agency found violated federal law by falsely marketing their products as “Made in America” when, in fact, most of their merchandise was manufactured in China.

But the three Republican commissioners — all appointed by Mr. Trump — overruled them and voted against imposing any fines or penalties at all. They said the companies should not be required to admit any wrongdoing or notify customers of their false marketing, arguing that the threat of future penalties served as a strong enough deterrent to prevent a repeat offense.

The vote, which took place on Tuesday, broke along party lines — just not necessarily the expected ones.

Since the 2016 election, Mr. Trump has promoted himself as the man who will resuscitate American manufacturing and jobs. In April 2017, he signed a “Buy American and Hire American” executive order, with the goal of promoting American-made goods “to ensure that American labor is hired to do the job.”

But on the F.T.C., Mr. Trump’s own appointees appeared to be out of step with the trade policy espoused by the president.

“The Republican commissioners didn’t get the memo from President Trump about the ‘Buy America, Hire America’ administration,” said Lori Wallach, director of the Global Trade Watch at Public Citizen, a consumer advocacy group.

White House officials declined to comment.

The case at hand involves three companies that the trade commission found violated the law. One was a New Jersey-based hockey puck manufacturer, Patriot Puck, which wrapped its China-made hockey pucks in American flags and falsely declared them “The Only American Made Hockey Puck!”

Two more companies, Sandpiper and PiperGear, manufacturers of deployment bags and tactical gear, marketed their wears to active and retired American military personnel, branded themselves online as #MadeInUSA, and put “American Made” tags in some of their products. In reality, most of those goods were also manufactured in China, according to the commission.

Mr. Trump’s handpicked chairman of the commission, Joseph J. Simons, defended the decision not to impose penalties on the companies. In a statement, Mr. Simons said “the threat of significant penalties” going forward had “been largely successful in keeping companies under order from making deceptive ‘Made in U.S.A.’ claims.” He argued that the decision was consistent with how the commission had dealt with similar cases in the past, and said it was a “strategic choice” to use the commission’s “limited resources” simply to make sure the companies did not break the law in the future.

But on Wednesday, one of the Democratic commissioners who had previously sided with Mr. Simons changed her position. “I am persuaded that we should seek disgorgement of ill-gotten gains and an admission of liability in these cases,” Rebecca Kelly Slaughter wrote in a dissenting statement. “And I understand that, if the companies refuse to agree to such terms, we would have to expend substantial resources for, and take on the risk associated with, litigation.”

The more stringent penalties, Ms. Slaughter said, “would send an unmistakable message that there will be meaningful consequences for brazenly mislabeling wholly imported products as American-made — even the first time that a fraudster gets caught.”

The agency’s other Democratic commissioner, Rohit Chopra, is taking the crusade against violators a step further, attempting to change the agency’s entire approach to handling “Made in America” violations.

Mr. Chopra, in a dissenting statement, argued that the F.T.C. was given the authority to activate steep penalties on first-time violators since the North American Free Trade Agreement was passed in 1994 but has simply never used it. Mr. Chopra said he wanted the trade commission to activate a legal switch to “turn on” penalties that would make violators pay $42,530 in fines per violation, starting on the first offense.

In many cases over the past two decades, settlements with companies that violated “Made in America” rules were subject only to record-keeping and reporting requirements to make sure they did not violate the law again.

“We cannot effectively protect honest businesses and promote fair competition if there are no consequences for violating the law,” Mr. Chopra said in his dissenting opinion. “Given troubling trends in today’s economy, I intend to make a motion to pursue a Made in U.S.A. rule that would allow the commission to seek meaningful penalties against those that harm law-abiding companies that make goods in America.”



Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

The Washington Capitals have recalled goaltender Ilya Samsonov from their AHL affiliate in Hershey, the team announced Thursday. The Caps' first-round pick in 2015, Samsonov has posted a record of 19-14-5 with a 2.74 goals against average and a .896 save percentage in 36 games with the Bears this season. The 6-foot-2 goaltender recorded three shutouts and posted a 10-0-1 record from Jan. 12 through Feb. 27.

Samsonov, 22, was the first goalie selected in the 2015 draft but struggled to adapt to North American hockey.

The Capitals host the Carolina Hurricanes in Game 1 of their first-round playoff game Thursday night.

--Field Level Media

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

JUNK, by Les Bohem, read by John Waters. (Audible.) Waters, a Hollywood veteran both in front of and behind the camera, narrates the Emmy-winning screenwriter’s epic story of an alien takeover of Planet Earth, set in present-day Los Angeles.

TOO MUCH IS NOT ENOUGH, by Andrew Rannells, read by the author. (Penguin Random House Audio.) The star of “The Book of Mormon” and “Girls” on HBO recounts his coming-of-age from a sexually confused Midwestern teenager to finding his footing as an actor in Manhattan.

QUEENIE, by Candice Carty-Williams, read by Shvorne Marks. (Simon & Schuster Audio.) The “Endeavour” actor gives voice to a 20-something Jamaican-British journalist navigating the trials of interracial dating, in a tale so full of humor she’s been called a “black Bridget Jones.”

SAL & GABI BREAK THE UNIVERSE, by Carlos Hernandez, read by Anthony Rey Perez. (Listening Library.) This mystical middle-grade novel set at a magnet school in Miami lends a Cuban-American lilt to the genre of science fiction.

REMEMBERING ROTH, by James Atlas, read by the author. (Audible.) The biographer narrates an intimate homage to the late novelist, with whom he shared a decades-long, but not uncomplicated, literary friendship.

All the talk about the Varsity Blues admissions scandal and parents bribing college coaches to get their kids into the universities of their choice inspired me to go back and read BEARTOWN, by Fredrik Backman, the 2017 novel about the three H’s — hockey, high school and last, best hope — in a small Swedish town. Nominally a story about the transformative power of sports, it is, like many supposed sports novels (and films, for that matter, and TV shows), actually about friendship, morality and achievement. Whether you have any feelings at all about hockey (I don’t, really), it is impossible not to get swept up in these kids’ lives and what they learn on the ice. At a time when a lot of cynicism is about to be attached to the whole concept of an athlete, there is a purity here, a sense of pain and joy, that has nothing to do with hackneyed metaphors and everything to do with compelling characters and a wrenching story, beautifully told. (Also: There is a great sequel.)

— Vanessa Friedman, fashion director and chief fashion critic

Follow New York Times Books on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Joe Lemire

On the day after February’s trade deadline stripped the Rangers of three key veterans, David Quinn’s whistle pierced the practice rink air. The coach barked with the rasp of a well-worn instructor’s voice, “That can’t happen.” The Rangers reran the drill, which Quinn this time punctuated with “good job.”

An hour into the session, Quinn skated in to speak quietly with Brendan Lemieux during a defensive routine. Lemieux, the 23-year-old prospect acquired in a trade for Kevin Hayes, had met Quinn only that morning after joining from the Winnipeg Jets.

“That’s what was really cool about my first practice,” Lemieux said afterward. “I was already learning things, being taught. I guess that goes to what kind of coach he is. He’s a teacher. There are a lot of N.H.L. coaches that aren’t like that.”

With the Rangers more than a year into a rebuild, teaching a young team has been Quinn’s primary objective. Ten players on the Rangers’ roster are 23 or younger. Entering the final game of the season, the Rangers have just four wins in 19 games since the trade deadline on Feb. 25, though seven losses were by a single goal, including five in overtime or a shootout.

“We were close, but that doesn’t cut it in this league,” Quinn said.

He arrived in New York last May after five years as the head coach at Boston University and more than two decades leading or assisting predominantly A.H.L., college and national team development programs. Quinn’s own promising playing career came to an abrupt end in college with the diagnosis of hemophilia and a life-threatening injury.

“When you look at what he’s gone through as a coach in order to reach the pinnacle of the game, not a lot of people would go through what Quinny has gone through,” said Penguins Coach Mike Sullivan, a former teammate at B.U. “I think that’s a reflection of his love of the sport but also his competitive nature.”

General Manager Jeff Gorton called Quinn’s track record with young players a huge part of his appeal. That recent history included work with four first-round picks while leading B.U., a group headlined by the Buffalo Sabres star Jack Eichel. Quinn, 52, had taken over for the longtime coach Jack Parker — for whom Quinn played in the 1980s — and he expected to spend his career there even as three N.H.L. teams called to gauge his interest.

But, Quinn said, “It’s the New York Rangers.”

“I really don’t think I ever would have left B.U. for any other situation, or people, or organization than this,” he added. “Everything aligned. Every single thing.”

Quinn has so often preached his desire that the Rangers play “fast, physical, and relentless” hockey that some players refer to the phrase as “our team slogan.” His first season was notable for its hard practices, blunt postgame assessments and healthy scratches. Quinn’s players, past and present, consistently mention his honest and direct style of giving feedback.

“He’s very good at communicating, but he’s so smart about the way he does it, too,” Eichel said.

Sabres forward Evan Rodrigues, who played his junior and senior seasons at B.U. under Quinn, had a goal and an assist in his first game for Quinn in October 2013. Afterward, Quinn asked the player for a self-evaluation. Rodrigues said, “Probably like a B, B+.” Quinn replied, “Well, I give you a C-.”

In hindsight, Rodrigues realized his coach was right.

“I don’t doubt much that he says,” Rodrigues said, before adding: “I’m very, very thankful for him because I don’t think I’d be where I am today if it weren’t for him.”

Quinn attributed that plain-spoken manner partly to his father — “an old-school Irish cop” — and to his sudden diagnosis as a college sophomore with hemophilia B, also known as Christmas disease.

“Life experiences form all of us,” he said. “I think that is probably why I’m so direct with people because of what I’ve been through personally. I really believe those experiences — because I really struggled for two years after that. Then I got back on my feet and went, ‘All right, hey, look how lucky I am, really.’”

After Quinn dealt with persistent bruising throughout the 1985-86 season, B.U.’s team physician suggested he get blood work after the playoffs. The tests showed hemophilia.

“I’m 20 years old and I think I’m going to play in the N.H.L. and I think I’m going to play for the ’88 Olympic team,” Quinn said. “You’re talking about a big kick in the teeth, you know? I’m trying to scramble. What am I going to do with my life? I had my next 15 years mapped out. I was a first-round pick, I’m going to play in the N.H.L. And I went through some tough times, but I always thought to myself, ‘The people who really have affected me in my life other than my parents are my coaches.’”

Quinn continued playing for B.U., but, after an injury-plagued junior season, he badly sprained his right ankle playing pickup basketball. The bruising turned into compartment syndrome, which required surgery. In his Rangers office recently, he rolled down a red-and-blue striped sock to expose a scar running down the outer half of his calf muscle to his ankle.

He was in the hospital for five weeks and said he almost bled to death. His collegiate hockey career was over. Quinn remained at B.U. to finish his sociology degree and helped coach the school’s junior varsity hockey team.

In 1991, the F.D.A. approved a drug trial to help hemophiliacs clot more quickly. By injecting himself before every practice and game, Quinn returned to the ice in what he refers to only as a “pseudo-comeback.” He had not skated in four years and had lost some mobility in his right foot.

Quinn signed with the Rangers in 1992 and played a year and a half of minor league hockey. He had been a lock for the 1988 Olympic team but was a late cut from the ’92 squad. He tried out one final time for the 1994 roster, but was cut early.

The night he was cut, Quinn was in his family’s home in Cranston, R.I., when his former B.U. assistant coach Ben Smith called. Smith had taken over as Northeastern head coach and offered Quinn an assistant job. He drove to Boston the next day.

Quinn spent two nomadic decades in the coaching ranks. He was associate coach of B.U.’s 2009 N.C.A.A. championship team and was head coach of the 2015 squad that lost in the national title game. He was known for his recruiting panache.

“I remember my mom couldn’t stop talking about him,” said Rangers defenseman Kevin Shattenkirk, who was recruited to B.U. by Quinn. “He put the charm on my mom. I think, more than anything, he just had this presence to him.”

Now, Quinn is charged with coaxing the most out of the Rangers’ young talent.

“They’re a structured team,” said Florida Panthers associate coach Jack Capuano, a lifelong friend of Quinn’s. “They work hard. Obviously they’re buying into what he’s selling.”

Quinn said the Rangers had “some good pieces here to build around,” citing the advances the Islanders and the Canadiens have made since last season.

A talented new piece of the puzzle is likely on its way. The Rangers will participate in the N.H.L. draft lottery on Tuesday.

Quinn, who lamented the lack of practice time in the N.H.L., called the challenge of rebuilding through development “very appealing.”

“You really get a chance as the coach to be very involved in the process of the next great team here, hopefully,” he said.

An earlier version of this article misstated the number of overtime losses the Rangers had since the trade deadline on Feb. 25. It was five, not four.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

My Workout

The three-time Stanley Cup champion is a fan of Joovv lights, ashwaganda herbs, PoV Sport and Lululemon. 

By Bee Shapiro

Duncan Keith, 35, is a three-time Stanley Cup champion and Conn Smythe Trophy winner, who recently played his 1,000th professional hockey game, all with the Chicago Blackhawks. A small-town guy at heart, he splits his time between Chicago and Penticton, British Columbia, where he grew up. 

He took a moment out of his punishing National Hockey League season (his 14th!) to share his workout and wellness secrets, and why he is obsessed with infrared therapy lights. 

I get up around 8 a.m. In the 45 minutes before I leave the house, I have a routine: I go upstairs to my lab, where I have a bunch of little things that I do to stay healthy. I try to get as much sunlight as possible, but I also have Joovv lights — they’re red and infrared lights, which are very healing. 

Then I lay on my Bemer mat, which has electromagnetic currents, for eight minutes. I also have my supplements like glutathione and vitamin C, and liquid herbs like ashwaganda. Sometimes at night, I’ll sleep with a hydrogen inhaler. I’m a biohacker and a part-time hockey player. It’s basically better living with the help of science.

During the season, I don’t do a whole lot of heavy lifting. I use PoV Sport, a machine that uses electricity to keep your muscles contracted. It’s about feeling strong without me having to do any excess movement. 

The off-season is when I work out the hardest. I’m in the gym about five times a week doing strength training. It’s all based on the Evo Ultrafit system that my strength trainer Jay Schroeder does. He’s based out of Phoenix. He trains a lot of professional football players and baseball players. It’s a lot of body-weight stuff and isometrics and speed Russian lunges. I’ll start ice skating in July. By the end of the August, I’m skating four to five times a week.

For me, the biggest thing for my skin care is the Joovv light. But then my buddy is a real skin fanatic with lots of different things. He told me about this skin care company called Eminence, and once in a while I’ll use the exfoliator in the steam shower.

I don’t love the hotel skin care stuff. I bring my own. I use Ancient Minerals body lotion that has magnesium in it. I order it off Amazon. My skin gets nice and moisturized but also gets a dose of magnesium. I use the Ben Greenfield’s serum, which is a mix of vitamin C and a bunch of different herbs. And then I do use cologne. I use the Tom Ford Neroli Portofino Acqua the most.

I wouldn’t say I’m on any specific diet. I’ve read Dr. Mercola’s books and I followed his nutrition plan for a while. But now, I just eat healthy and the biggest thing is getting a lot of calories in. I’m always burning calories during the season, and I’m trying to keep my mass on.

I read a lot of books and I listen to podcasts. My favorite is the Ben Greenfield fitness podcast. I guess you could call him a professional biohacker. I also listen to Aubrey Marcus and Joe Rogan.

Right now, I’m reading “Medical Medium” by Anthony William. It’s nonfiction and about food and nutrition. I enjoy reading and learning about the body. The first chapter is a little bit goofy, but essentially it’s about how important carbs and fruits are. It goes against a lot of things you hear today. 

I try to dress nice, but I’m not always thinking about it. I really like AllSaints jeans. I get most of my jeans from there. If not that, then I like Hudson jeans or Vince sweatpants. They’re like a classier pair of sweats. Lululemon is always comfortable.

I’ve been on ice skates ever since I was maybe 3 or 4. I was always trying to be a hockey player. But to play professionally, you have to have the determination and focus. I remember there were high school parties that I didn’t go to because I was always working on my game. I missed a lot of those times. You have to set a goal and not let anything get in your way. This involves not only yourself, but also your family and parents. They are all part of it.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Hockey Roundup

By The Associated Press

Minnesota Duluth won its second straight college hockey title, beating Massachusetts, 3-0, on Saturday night in Buffalo.

Mikey Anderson had a goal and two assists, and Parker Mackay and Noah Cates also scored for the Bulldogs (29-11-2), who became the ninth program to successfully defend a title and the first since Denver did so in 2004 and 2005.

Hunter Shepard stopped 18 shots for his seventh shutout of the season, improving his N.C.A.A. tournament record to 8-0. The Minutemen (31-10) were making their first appearance in the championship game, in just the second tournament berth in program history.

CAPITALS 4, HURRICANES 3 Brooks Orpik scored less than two minutes into overtime, Alex Ovechkin had two assists, and host Washington beat Carolina as the defending Stanley Cup champions took a 2-0 lead in the first-round series.

Orpik’s fourth goal in his 151st playoff game was his third winner, and he became the 11th defenseman in N.H.L. history with two postseason overtime goals.

BRUINS 4, MAPLE LEAFS 1 Brad Marchand and Patrice Bergeron scored, and Tuukka Rask stopped 30 shots, leading host Boston past Toronto and tying the first-round playoff series at one game apiece.

Nazem Kadri scored the Maple Leafs’ only goal midway through the third. He was given a game misconduct for cross-checking Jake DeBrusk with six minutes left.

PREDATORS 2, STARS 1 Craig Smith scored five minutes into overtime, giving Nashville a victory against Dallas and tying the first-round Western Conference series at 1-1.

Rocco Grimaldi also scored for Nashville, and Pekka Rinne made 22 saves. Jamie Benn scored for the Stars, who were outshot, 43-23.

LEAGUE SUSPENDS KUCHEROV The N.H.L.’s scoring champion, Nikita Kucherov, was suspended by the league for Game 3 of Tampa Bay’s first-round series against Columbus on Sunday. The Lightning lost the first two games.

Kucherov boarded Markus Nutivaara late in Tampa Bay’s 5-1 loss on Friday night.

U.S. WOMEN REACH FINAL The United States soared into the gold medal game at the women’s world hockey championship in Espoo, Finland, by routing Russia, 8-0, behind two goals each by Hilary Knight and Kelly Pannek.

The undefeated Americans will go for their fifth straight title Sunday against Finland, which jolted Canada, 4-2, in the other semifinal.

Finland goalie Noora Raty, playing in her hometown, made 43 saves, helping her country past the heavily favored Canadians. The United States and Canada had met in all 18 previous world championship finals.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Seth Berkman

Last weekend, the Metropolitan Riveters nearly re-enacted “Planes, Trains and Automobiles” trying to reach their semifinal game of the National Women’s Hockey League playoffs.

The Riveters dealt with predawn alarms; being momentarily stranded in Charlotte, N.C.; and losing most of their equipment. The game, against the Minnesota Whitecaps in St. Paul, scheduled for last Sunday, was postponed. The semifinal will now be played Friday night in St. Paul, with the Isobel Cup final scheduled for two days later at the same rink.

The N.W.H.L., in its fourth season, has had travel-and weather-related postponements before, as have other professional leagues like the W.N.B.A. Despite partnerships with four N.H.L. franchises, N.W.H.L. teams still travel with budgetary and time constraints.

Some Riveters players who expected to play last Sunday will not be available for the rescheduled game because they cannot take the day off from their full-time jobs.

Kelsey Koelzer, a star on defense for the Riveters, is one of those casualties in the tough financial landscape still facing pro women’s hockey. This year, N.W.H.L. salaries range from $3,000 to $10,000.

“It’s very frustrating,” Koelzer said after practice Tuesday night, beginning to choke up. “You work hard the whole season. You dedicate so much of your time. I’ve done my absolute best to get to every game possible. To reflect and think my season is potentially over and I didn’t even know that the last game I was going to play this season was my last game, it’s frustrating. It’s sad.”

Other sacrifices were made for this unusual weekend of women’s hockey in Minnesota. The Buffalo Beauts, the No. 2 seed, gave up the right to possibly host the championship game against the Riveters. The Beauts were 8-0 at their home rink this season.

Last Saturday, the majority of the Riveters were scheduled on a 2:53 p.m. flight to Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport from La Guardia Airport. The team arrived at the airport two hours before takeoff, but because of wintry weather in the Midwest, the flight was canceled.

Anya Battaglino, the director of the N.W.H.L. players’ association, then began working with the league on other options.

An early Sunday morning flight from John F. Kennedy International Airport to Minneapolis, with a connection in Charlotte, was the most feasible option. Because of daylight saving time, players woke up around 1:30 a.m. to ensure no preboarding snafus. They boarded the plane just past 5 a.m., but it had to be de-iced. An hour later, the team still had not taken off, and began worrying about making its connection and reaching the arena for the opening face-off at 1:30 p.m. Central time.

The Riveters landed in Charlotte around 8:02 a.m., missing their 7:40 a.m. connecting flight. About an hour later, the league announced the game was postponed.

“We were all so delirious and hungry and tired, I think everybody was kind of relieved,” Riveters forward Miye D’Oench said. “Up until that moment, we were still sort of trying to stay in a game-day mind-set. It got harder to do as the day went on and more things went wrong.”

The Riveters touched back down in Queens early Sunday afternoon, only to learn most of their equipment and personal bags were headed to Minnesota.

That was not the only headache. Battaglino, the league office and players on the Riveters, the Whitecaps and the Beauts, who won their semifinal matchup against the Boston Pride on Saturday, had to figure out when and where to hold a makeup game.

A Saturday semifinal and Sunday final was proposed, but some players worried about playing on consecutive days. In addition, the University of Minnesota’s women’s hockey team, a huge draw locally, has an N.C.A.A. tournament game against Princeton on Saturday. Travel for the Riveters and the Beauts also had to be considered.

Eventually, a vote on Monday morning led to the Friday/Sunday setup. But that did not alleviate all concerns. While a majority of the Riveters were to fly out Thursday night (with no serious inclement weather in the forecast), Battaglino said seven players or staff members would travel separately from the team to better accommodate their schedules.

Some members of the Riveters, the defending champions, see the travel problems as a possible advantage against the top-seeded Whitecaps.

“Last weekend’s travel woes were very extreme, and I think it brought us closer as a team,” D’Oench said. “In a certain sense, sometimes going through a lot of adversity can sometimes play to a team’s advantage, and we’ve certainly had no shortage of adversity this season.”

Battaglino said last weekend’s “fire drill” would be a learning experience and help influence future scheduling. The league openly discussed their decision-making process in a letter to fans.

Koelzer said if the Riveters won Friday, she would look into getting to Minnesota for Sunday’s final. Now well-rested, many of the Riveters are confident they can defeat the Whitecaps, whom they were 0-4 against this season.

But Kimberly Sass, a backup goaltender for the Riveters who documented last weekend’s travel woes on social media, is starting a new full-time job and cannot afford to take Friday off.

On Tuesday, she wrote on Twitter that she hoped that in the future, “female professional athletes will never be faced with the decision to attend a game, or risk ruining a professional reputation at their non-sport place of employment.”





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By The Associated Press

BUFFALO, N.Y. — Scott Sandelin is no different than anyone else in appreciating a rags-to-riches journey such as the Massachusetts hockey program has enjoyed over the past three years.

And if the Minnesota Duluth coach didn't have something at stake in facing the upstart Minutemen in the Frozen Four championship game Saturday night, Sandelin would probably be rooting for them, too.

"It's a credit to them, their recruiting, getting players. Sometimes it doesn't go that quickly," he said of a team reaching the final in only its second NCAA Tournament appearance and just three years removed from a 5-29-2 finish.

"It's kind of a cool story to see teams take that step up. It gives hope for a lot of programs," he added.

It's not lost on Sandelin, either, that his coaching career at Duluth began with a seven-win finish in 2000-01. Now he's joined the likes of Herb Brooks and Bob Johnson in becoming one of nine coaches to reach four finals.

The championship features a contrasting matchup of programs on opposite ends of the success spectrum. The defending champion Bulldogs (28-11-2) are the seventh team to reach the final in three consecutive years — and first since Boston College from 2006-08.

By comparison, the Minutemen (31-9) have mostly a history of losing. Their 31 wins alone this year are 10 more than the school's previous single-season best, and one more than UMass had in its previous three years combined.

Even third-year coach Greg Carvel had difficulty envisioning UMass extending its season to mid-April.

"I'll share a secret with you," Carvel said in explaining how in September he booked flights for his family to leave Saturday on its annual Florida vacation.

The travel conflict didn't hit Carvel until he woke up Friday — mere hours after Marc Del Gaizo scored 15:18 into overtime in 4-3 semifinal win over Denver — and scrambled to change the bookings.

"It was the happiest $200 per flight charge I'll ever make," he said.

The first glimpses of the Minutemen's turnaround came a year ago with a highly talented class of freshmen led by defenseman Cale Makar , one of three finalists to win the Hobey Baker award given to college hockey's top player. Though expectations grew after a 17-20-2 finish last year, it wasn't until UMass split a two-game series at then-top-ranked Ohio State in October when the Minutemen began realizing their potential.

Senior forward Kurt Keats remembered the team's mood in winning the first game 6-3.

"We got up 3- or 4-0 early and we kind of came into the room and we were like, 'Boys, we're legit. This is the No. 1 team in the country and we're taking it to them," Keats said.

UMass completed a season in which it never lost two straight, and advanced to the Frozen Four by beating both Harvard and Notre Dame 4-0, then knocking off eight-time champion Denver.

And yet the Minutemen are still considered the underdog because of their past and lack of experience on such a big stage.

"We see the articles and stuff like that, and everybody is: 'Is UMass for real?'" Keats said. "All year, everybody's doubted us, and I think we've kind of thrived in the underdog role."

Sandelin is hardly overlooking UMass.

"All I know is if you win 31 games, you're a damn good hockey team. And they are," Sandelin said. "If that's how people want to spin it, I mean, I guess there's reasons for that."

The Bulldogs are leaning on the experiences gained in preparing to play their 12th tournament game in three years. After losing the 2017 championship 3-2 to Denver in 2017, Minnesota Duluth bounced back to beat Notre Dame 2-1 last year.

Minnesota Duluth opened this year's tournament by rallying from a 1-0 deficit to beat Bowling Green 2-1 in overtime, and then defeating Quinnipiac 3-1. On Thursday, the Bulldogs overcame two disallowed goals and killed off a two-man-advantage in the third period of a 4-1 win over Providence .

"Having that experience is big," senior forward Peter Krieger said. "Coming in and knowing how hard it is to get here, what it takes to get here, cherishing every opportunity because we've been fortunate enough to win it last year: We want that feeling again."

NOTES: UMass forward Bobby Trivigno will not play Saturday after being suspended by the NCAA for one game stemming from his being ejected against Denver for an illegal hit to the head. ... Bulldogs captain Parker Mackay will appear in his 14th tournament game, the most since four members of Boston College's senior class in 2008. ... Carvel has an opportunity to become the eighth coach to win the championship in his first appearance.

___

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

“I’ve got a screw loose, sure. It takes a special type of person to want to get a puck in the head.”

MARK PHILIPPS, a goaltender in Toronto’s recreational hockey leagues. With many more teams than available goalies, hired guns are a hot commodity. The going rate is about 50 Canadian dollars a game.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

In her words

The U.S. women’s soccer team has filed a gender discrimination lawsuit. The players are the latest athletes to demand equal treatment. 

By Maya Salam

You’re reading In Her Words, where women rule the headlines. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox. Let me know what you think at dearmaya@nytimes.com.

“Everyone thinks women should be thrilled when we get crumbs, and I want women to have the cake, the icing and the cherry on top, too.”

— Billie Jean King, a tennis legend who led the charge for pay equality in her sport

Last week, all 28 players on the U.S. women’s national soccer team — the greatest women’s soccer team in the world — filed a gender discrimination lawsuit against the United States Soccer Federation, another move in its long-running battle for equality.

The athletes — including the stars Alex Morgan, Megan Rapinoe and Carli Lloyd — are not just taking issue with their paychecks but also with where they play, how they travel to matches, and the medical treatment and coaching they receive, in what they called “institutionalized gender discrimination,” as my colleague Andy Das reported.

“We’ve always, dating back to forever, been a team that stood up for itself and fought hard for what it felt it deserved and tried to leave the game in a better place,” Rapinoe told The New York Times on Friday.

The women’s team holds a record three World Cup championships and four Olympic gold medals.

[READ MORE: U.S. Women’s Soccer Team Sues U.S. Soccer for Gender Discrimination]

The issue of pay inequality in sports is of course not just soccer’s problem. Women across all sports are paid less, and many have fought for equity in salary and in prize money. 

Here are other cases where pay inequality has been stark, compelling female athletes to speak out.

The U.S. Open. After long-fought battles by champions like Billie Jean King, Chris Evert, Martina Navratilova, and Venus and Serena Williams, tennis has seen the most progress when it comes to pay equity.  The first real appeal was made in 1970 by King, after a tournament in Italy for which she was paid just $600 for taking the women’s title. The men’s winner was awarded $3,500. King would later make this statement: “Everyone thinks women should be thrilled when we get crumbs, and I want women to have the cake, the icing and the cherry on top, too.”In 1973, King threatened to sit out the U.S. Open unless the prize money was made equal. It worked. That year, the men’s and women’s champions were paid equally, and the U.S. Open has paid its winners equally since. Other Grand Slams, though, were slow to follow suit.

[READ MORE: Eight Times Women in Sports Fought for Equality]

The Australian Open, and other Grand Slams. Prize money for the Australian Open had fluctuated for decades: In 1978, the men’s winner was paid about 585 percent more than the women’s, ESPN reported last year. And in the mid-1980s, the women’s winner was paid slightly more. By the mid-1990s, men were again paid more, prompting officials in the Women's Tennis Association to push hard for equal pay. In 2001, the Australian Open agreed, and winners have been compensated equally since. The French Open came around in 2006, and then Wimbledon in 2007, a change led by Venus Williams. Williams made a failed plea to Wimbledon’s governing body the night before she took the title in 2005. And in 2006, she wrote an op-ed in The Times of London titled “Wimbledon Has Sent Me a Message: I’m Only a Second Class Champion.” In 2007, she was awarded $1.4 million for her victory, the same as the men’s champion, Roger Federer. More recently, Novak Djokovic, currently the No. 1 men’s player in the world, suggested men deserve more money. “The stats are showing that we have much more spectators on the men’s tennis matches,” he said in 2016. “I think that’s one of the reasons why maybe we should get awarded more.”

The W.N.B.A. When compared with the N.B.A., athletes in the W.N.B.A. face extreme pay disparities — though, as is often pointed out, the N.B.A. is a multibillion dollar industry, while the W.N.B.A. is not. Nonetheless, in 2018, the W.N.B.A. set an individual salary cap of $117,500, and rookies earned a minimum of about $50,000. The minimum starting salary for N.B.A. players is about $580,000.

Last summer, A’ja Wilson, a star rookie who was the No. 1 overall W.N.B.A. draft pick in 2018, commented on LeBron James’s $154 million contract with the Los Angeles Lakers. “Must be nice. We over here looking for an M but Lord, let me get back in my lane,” she tweeted. Wilson earned about $53,000 that season. The top N.B.A. draft pick last year, Deandre Ayton, is expected to earn $6.8 million in his first year.

U.S.A. Hockey. In March 2017, the women’s national hockey team announced that it would boycott the coming world championship if U.S.A. Hockey did not increase the women’s wages. The risk paid off. Within days, the team and U.S.A. Hockey reached a four-year deal that gave the female players a $2,000 training stipend each month from the United States Olympic Committee and larger bonuses for winning medals. “We want to do the fair thing, and the right thing — not just for hockey but for all women,” Meghan Duggan, the team’s captain, said at the time.

Sign up here to get In Her Words delivered to your inbox!

______

Here are five articles from The Times you might have missed.

“My passion has been taken away.” A midwife who has delivered hundreds of babies for Mennonite women is facing felony charges for practicing without the proper license. The women are speaking publicly in her defense. [Read the story] 

“Black audiences are what I’ve considered my base, and I will always make movies for that base.” The actress Regina Hall talks about the two Hollywoods, spirituality and success. [Read the story]

“Even Google can no longer hide its gender pay gap.” A new federal rule will force big companies to report pay scales according to gender and race. [Read the story]

“I didn’t mean to be brave.” When her husband was arrested on child pornography charges, Maddie Corman’s world fell apart. Then she made a play about it. [Read the story]

“It will be good not to be a black spot on the map any longer.” Mario Batali exits his restaurants a year after reports that he sexually assaulted and harassed women. [Read the story]

______

For Women’s History Month, we’re highlighting stories of trailblazing women you may not know, but should. We’ll bring you two women each week in this newsletter; head over to our Instagram for daily posts.

In 1995, Alison Hargreaves became the first woman to conquer Mount Everest alone, without bottled oxygen or the help of Sherpas. When she reached the peak, she sent a radio message to her son and daughter: “To Tom and Kate, my dear children, I am on the highest point of the world, and I love you dearly.” 

Her homeland, Britain, rejoiced. But the excitement did not last long. Three months later, Hargreaves, 33, died descending from the summit of K2 in Pakistan. Read more about Alison Hargreaves here.

Sign up here to get future installments of In Her Words delivered to your inbox. 

Read past articles here. 

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By George Gene Gustines

When new comic books arrive in stores on April 17, retailers who ordered the latest issue of a Buffy comic will get a bonus: free copies of Issue No. 0 of Angel, a new series.

“We wanted to do something special with the launch of Angel,” Arune Singh, the vice president of marketing for Boom! Studios, the publisher, said in an interview. The notion, he noted, became, “How do we do a Beyoncé album drop, but for comic book stores?”

Keeping Angel under wraps was no easy feat. Retailers and fans hear about new comics months in advance and sometimes even earlier. Boom! worked with Diamond Comic Distributors, the hub for retailers, on the top-secret project — playfully code-named Tooth Fairy, after the film starring Dwayne Johnson, a.k.a. the Rock, as a hockey player. (Angel is a hockey fan.)

Angel, a vampire with remorse, will expand the universe of Buffy the Vampire Slayer, which was rebooted in January. Like the new Buffy series, Angel will be set in contemporary times, not in 1999 when the character’s television series — a spinoff of the 1997 “Buffy” TV show — first aired.

The Angel series is written by Bryan Edward Hill, drawn by Gleb Melnikov, colored by Gabriel Cassata and lettered by Ed Dukeshire. The first three pages of the issue present a different perspective on the final moments of Buffy No. 4, which arrives in stores the same day. In the Buffy comic, one of the characters is in a dire predicament, which is silently observed by Angel. In his comic, Angel sees the struggle, but readers are clued into his brooding on past sins and a cycle of violence. “I might be powerless to break it,” he thinks, “but who would I be if I didn’t try?”

[Read about the new Buffy the Vampire Slayer comic that arrived in January.]

In 2018, Boom! Studios announced it had acquired the rights to publish comics based on some of the creations of Joss Whedon, including the “Buffy” TV show as well as the 2002 “Firefly” series. But there was no mention of Angel, Buffy’s star-crossed love interest.

The Buffy series has seen growing popularity — sales to stores have steadily increased from 25,000 copies for issue No. 2, in February, to 32,000 copies for issue No. 4 — and the company wanted to encourage more readers to discover her adventures by visiting a store.

[Read about a publisher, TKO Studios, with a new binge-release model.]

Last week, Bleeding Cool, a website devoted to pop culture, reported on the existence of Tooth Fairy No. 0 and began speculating about what the comic could be.

This isn’t the first surprise comic. Robert Kirkman, the creator of The Walking Dead comic that spawned the television franchise, pulled off some magic last July. He sent retailers copies of his series Die!Die!Die!, which he wrote with Scott M. Gimple. It was drawn by Chris Burnham and colored by Nathan Fairbairn.

“Hopefully the excitement of a surprise launch like this will bring people into your stores,” Kirkman wrote in a letter to the shops, “and we can all celebrate another successful series launch together.”

Boom! is giving retailers around the country some of the 29,000 copies of Angel No. 0, which has a cover price of $3.99, based on the number of copies of Buffy No. 3 (from March) that they ordered. Additionally, Angel No. 0 will not be available for download until May 1, making the need to visit a comic store more immediate.

“We want these comic shop retailers, who are the lifeblood of this industry, to know we are committed to them,” Singh said.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Sarah Mervosh and Christina Caron

On Friday, all 28 players on the United States women’s soccer team filed a gender discrimination lawsuit against the United States Soccer Federation, an escalation in their increasingly public battle for equality.

The players have said that they play more games than the men’s team — and win more of them — yet still receive less pay. They said “institutionalized gender discrimination” affected not only their paychecks, but also where they played and how often, how they trained, the medical care and coaching they received, and even how they traveled to matches.

They are not alone in their fight for fairer pay and better treatment. Here are eight times in recent memory when women fought for equality in sports.

Experts claimed for years that distance running was damaging to women’s health and femininity.

In 1967, women weren’t allowed to officially enter the Boston Marathon, so Kathrine Switzer entered that year as “K.V. Switzer” to hide her gender.

Two miles in, an official tried to eject her from the course, a moment captured in dramatic photographs. She finished anyway, becoming the first woman to complete the race as an official entrant.

“We learned that women are not deficient in endurance and stamina, and that running requires no fancy facilities or equipment,” Switzer wrote in The New York Times in 2007.

Women were officially allowed to enter the race in 1972. Women’s marathoning joined the Olympics in 1984.

The year 1973 was a big one for Billie Jean King, the trailblazing tennis star.

She founded the Women’s Tennis Association. She led a movement for female players to earn equal prize money in tournaments that featured players of both sexes.

And, on a September night at the Astrodome in Houston, she epitomized her crusade for gender equality when she handily beat Bobby Riggs, a self-described male chauvinist pig, in the Battle of the Sexes.

King went on to receive the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2009 for her work championing the rights of women and gay people. She is considered to be one of the most important athletes of the 20th century.

“Everyone thinks women should be thrilled when we get crumbs,” King once said. “I want women to have the cake, the icing and the cherry on top, too.”

Chris Ernst is a two-time Olympic rower. But in the spring of 1976, she was the captain of Yale University’s women’s crew team — and sick of not having proper showers to use after practice.

She led 18 teammates in an eye-catching protest at Yale’s athletic office. The athletes stripped to their waists, revealing the words “Title IX,” which had been drawn in blue marker on each woman’s back and breasts.

The Times ran an article in the next day’s paper, and a photograph of the history-making event also ran in The Yale Daily News.

Within two weeks, the female rowers had new locker rooms. And, across the country, educators began viewing Title IX — which had been in effect for just four years — as a law that required compliance.

In 2007, after pressure from the tennis great Venus Williams and others, Wimbledon announced that women’s tennis players would receive prize money equal to the men’s.

Williams had made a failed plea to Wimbledon’s governing body the night before she won the title in 2005. And in 2006, she wrote an op-ed essay in The Times of London titled “Wimbledon Has Sent Me a Message: I’m Only a Second Class Champion.”

“Have you ever been let down by someone that you had long admired, respected and looked up to?” she wrote. “Little in life is more disappointing, particularly when that person does something that goes against the very heart of what you believe is right and fair.”

After the policies changed in 2007, she was awarded $1.4 million for her fourth Wimbledon victory, the same amount as the men’s champion, Roger Federer.

In March 2017, the women’s national hockey team announced that it would boycott the coming world championship if U.S.A. Hockey, the sport’s national governing body, did not increase the women’s wages.

“It’s hard to believe that in 2017, we have to fight so hard just to get equitable support,” Meghan Duggan, the team’s captain, said at the time. “We want to do the fair thing, and the right thing — not just for hockey but for all women.”

They put their careers on the line, but the risk paid off.

Less than two weeks later, the team reached a four-year deal with U.S.A. Hockey. It provided the female players a $2,000 training stipend each month from the United States Olympic Committee and larger bonuses for winning medals. The team also received the same travel and insurance provisions that the men’s national team did, and a pool of prize money to be split each year.

Four prominent female big-wave surfers, Bianca Valenti, Andrea Moller, Keala Kennelly and Paige Alms, spent years fighting for equal pay in the largely male sport where they regularly risk their lives.

Last July, the Committee for Equity in Women’s Surfing, an organization formed by six women, sent letters to the California Coastal Commission arguing that by treating women unequally, the World Surf League was in violation of state civil rights law.

Months later, in September, Valenti and other female surfers earned a victory when the World Surf League announced it would offer equal prize money to men and women.

Valenti, along with Sabrina Brennan, the president of the San Mateo County Harbor Commission, and Karen Tynan, a labor lawyer, also successfully pushed for women to be included in the Maverick’s Challenge, a big-wave surfing competition that had traditionally invited only men.

“Some people would tell me that by trying to get the (prize) pie redistributed I was ruining it for everyone,” Moller said in December. “But I would just say: ‘That’s wrong. We’re fighting for the industry. People love watching women surf big waves, so the whole sport will grow.’”

In the world of professional basketball, pay disparities are well-documented: In the N.B.A., a multibillion-dollar industry where players often make millions, the minimum starting salary is about eight times what the average W.N.B.A. player makes.

And female players are speaking up, on social media and on TV.

Skylar Diggins-Smith, the W.N.B.A. All-Star who plays guard for the Dallas Wings, recently appeared in a commercial to raise awareness about pay inequity.

The commercial, by the investment adviser Wealthsimple, contrasts the paths of two young players, a boy and a girl. Each lists their basketball dreams and accomplishments, but only one will grow up to receive a multimillion-dollar rookie contract.

A’ja Wilson, a star rookie who was the first overall W.N.B.A. draft pick in 2018, has also weighed in: “must. be. nice,” she wrote about LeBron James’s $154 million contract with the Los Angeles Lakers. “We over here looking for a M but Lord, let me get back in my lane.”

Wilson earned about $53,000 that season. The top N.B.A. draft pick last year, Deandre Ayton, was expected to earn about $6.8 million in his first year playing for the Phoenix Suns.

Ada Hegerberg, a 23-year-old Norwegian, was recognized as the best female soccer player in the world last year when she became the first person to win the women’s Ballon d'Or, a prestigious individual honor in soccer that had previously been reserved for men.

Despite the big award, she has decided not to play on the biggest stage of all, the Women’s World Cup, in France this summer.

Hegerberg quit the Norwegian national team in 2017 in protest of what she said was a lack of support for women’s soccer in her home country.

“I was quite clear with them about what I thought needed to be better,” she said in an interview after winning the Ballon d’Or. “I gave them the reasons. I wish my national team all the best. I love my country. I wish I could play for them. In this case, I had to move on.”

Maya Salam and Mihir Zaveri contributed reporting.









Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Andrew Knoll

When the Winnipeg Jets play host to the Colorado Avalanche on Thursday night, the meeting will be more than a showcase of the Central Division leader against the league’s top-scoring line. It will be a glimpse of a decade-long transformation of Finnish hockey.

Patrik Laine of Winnipeg, 20, and Mikko Rantanen of Colorado, 22, have spent much of their young N.H.L. careers among the league leaders in scoring, gaining a spotlight for a golden generation from Finland, one of the smallest, and most successful, hockey-playing nations.

“That age group in Finland, there must be something in the water or they’re feeding them the right things up there,” said the Winnipeg captain, Blake Wheeler.

Seven players from Finland, a country of 5.5 million, have been top 10 draft picks since 2013, and nearly all of them are playing significant roles on their N.H.L. teams.

Laine, the No. 2 pick in 2016, almost immediately became the most recognizable face in Finnish hockey since Teemu Selanne. Despite some lean scoring stretches this season, Laine has been one of the league’s best goal-scorers over the past three seasons. In November, he scored five goals on five shots in a game against the St. Louis Blues, and he became the fourth-youngest player to reach 100 career goals.

The highlight of that month for Laine was the N.H.L’s return to Finland, where he notched a hat trick and then another goal in a pair of games in Helsinki against a fellow Finn, Aleksander Barkov, and the rest of the Florida Panthers.

“His shooting is a work of art,” said Sami Salo, a former N.H.L. defenseman who now coaches in Finland. “It doesn’t matter if the puck comes at a bad angle, he always seem to get a perfect shot any time.”

Rantanen, the No. 10 pick in 2015, has transformed himself into one of the league’s savviest and most imaginative playmakers. With 75 points, Rantanen is fourth in the N.H.L. in scoring and has combined with Nathan MacKinnon and Gabriel Landeskog to compile 206 points, tied with Calgary’s top line for the most of any trio.

“He can find the passing lane even though there’s five sticks in the way,” Laine said of Rantanen, with whom he has trained for the past three summers. “He’s going to find a way. He’s also one of the strongest players that age that I’ve ever seen.”

Two Finnish players, Selanne and Jari Kurri, have led the N.H.L. in goals during a regular season, and both are in the Hall of Fame. But behind Selanne and Kurri in career points per game by Finnish players are four active members of the N.H.L., all of them under 25. They are Laine, Rantanen, Barkov and Sebastian Aho of the Carolina Hurricanes.

Young Finnish defensemen are also making a mark. Dallas Stars defenseman Miro Heiskanen, the No. 3 pick in the 2017 draft, dominated in Finland as a teenager and was an All-Star last month in his first N.H.L. season. He has followed a path similar to that of Buffalo Sabres defenseman Rasmus Ristolainen, selected eighth in 2013.

Finland’s rise is evident in international play, too. In January, the Finns earned the gold medal at the world junior championship for the third time in six years, after winning it only twice in the 40 years before this run.

“If you win three times in six years, that tells you something,” said Rantanen, who played on the 2016 junior champions with Laine, Aho and Toronto Maple Leafs winger Kasperi Kapanen. “It’s not only luck or just one good tournament. In Finnish coaching, the level is going higher and higher. There are a lot of good, young coaches coming, and I think the biggest thing is that the coaches are trying to concentrate on individuals more than five or 10 years ago.”

Neither the national team’s success nor its players’ prolific totals in the N.H.L. are coincidental. Beginning in 2009, Finnish officials made considerable investments and sweeping changes that gave greater continuity to player development. In 2014, after a disastrous under-18 world championship tournament that included a 10-0 loss to its archrival Sweden, the Finnish federation held a wide-ranging summit that emphasized individual skills like skating, puck-handling, shooting, balance and strength training.

“They teach us a lot about playing together, but when we’re playing together, we need all players to have good individual skills, especially skating,” said Barkov, 23, an elite two-way player who averages a point per game. “Hockey is getting a lot faster and more skilled.”

Kurri, a former general manager of the national program, described the old model for success.

“If we didn’t have the most skilled players, we had to be a good as a team,” he said. “That’s how we could have success, for many many years. That and good goaltending, we always had a good goalie behind us.”

Finland did produce a generation of outstanding goalies, including winners of the Stanley Cup and the Vezina Trophy like Miikka Kiprusoff, Antti Niemi and Tuukka Rask. But now netminders have taken a back seat to skaters.

Nashville Predators goalie Pekka Rinne, 36, said that the emphasis on individual skills and the provocation of players’ imaginations through exposure to the N.H.L. has produced the most abundant and diverse crop of Finns ever to emerge in pro hockey.

“The Finnish player type used to be the very reliable, solid, two-way player who had a very successful career, maybe on lower lines,” said Rinne, who won the Vezina Trophy last season. “Now we have these individuals coming up with amazing skill, and I feel like there’s something to that exposure and kids being able to see, copy and try on their own.”

The mind-set is changing for defensemen, too, as Heiskanen and Ristolainen have not only logged big minutes but have also played with flair.

“Defensemen were kind of the players nobody wanted to be because you had to defend,” Salo said. “You can’t score really, you have to stay back. I see a big change in the mind of youngsters who are coming up. They are fearless with the puck; they want to score all the time.”

Jere Lehtinen, a former Dallas Stars right wing and the general manager of Finland’s national team, said that each win, each medal and each successful Finnish N.H.L. player reinforces belief and raises expectations for successive generations. His generation, which won medals at the Olympics and world championships, instilled confidence that games were winnable regardless of opponent, circumstance or score.

“Nowadays these guys, these kids coming in, they just come and they know they can win,” Lehtinen said. “They don’t hesitate at all, they’re not scared of losing.”

The Finnish pipeline shows no signs of drying up. Right wing Kaapo Kakko is expected to be a top 5 pick in the coming draft in June.

“It has taken a long, long time until the next wave of really good Finnish players,” Rinne said. “Now we are there, and I feel like every year there are new guys popping up. I’m very excited to watch those guys.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Carol Schram

VANCOUVER, British Columbia — Canada can deliver the crowds, but the rest of the hockey world is catching up when it comes to delivering on-ice results at the World Junior Championship, the top international under-20 men’s hockey tournament.

On Saturday, Finland earned its third gold medal in the last six years in the event, beating the United States, 3-2, in the championship game.

Saturday’s matchup was the first gold medal game between Finland and the United States at the World Junior Championship, but those teams have regularly been on the podium in recent years in an event once dominated by Canada.

Since 1977, Canada has won 17 gold medals, including two runs of five straight titles: from 1993 to 1997, and again from 2005 to 2009.

But this year’s tournament now will live in infamy — at least in Canada — as the first time the Canadians failed to earn a medal when serving as the tournament’s host. Finland eliminated Canada, 2-1 in overtime, in the quarterfinals. Canada has won the event only twice in the last 10 years, while Finland and the United States have each brought home three golds.

The United States is the only country to have reached the podium in each of the last four years (gold in 2017, silver in 2019 and bronze in 2016 and 2018). The Americans’ seven podium appearances in the last 10 years (three gold, one silver, three bronze) are second only to Russia’s eight (one gold, three silver, four bronze).

Finland’s gold was its fifth in tournament history and the federation’s first victory in North America, where games are played on a smaller ice surface than they are in Europe.

“You’re starting to see some teams get into this portion of the tournament regularly,” United States Coach Mike Hastings said. “I think that says a lot about all the programs that we’re talking about — all the countries. This is a very difficult tournament. Seeing who was here at the end — it’s hard to get here. For the countries that are doing it on a consistent basis, I think that says something about where they’re at.”

Dave Starman, an analyst for the tournament for NHL Network, is also a member of the coaching education program with USA Hockey. He said the recent success of American teams could be attributed in large part to a new development model that was introduced 10 years ago.

“We have absolutely reshaped how we’re teaching the game and how we’re teaching coaches how to teach the game,” Starman said. “We have really emphasized small-area games, and it goes along with age-appropriate practices.

“If we play a lot more 3-on-3, 2-on-2, where younger kids are touching the puck more, they’re in an environment where they’re going to have more fun and be more involved,” he added. “Not only are they going to have more fun and want to come back, they’re going to get better because they’re constantly involved in the play.”

The emphasis is the same in Finland, Starman said.

“A lot of their parents and their organizations don’t care who wins the average game by shortening a bench so they can win a game,” he said. “Their players play, and they use their bench. They believe in player development.”

The trends from the World Junior Championship are now showing up in the N.H.L., too. Over the last decade, the American and Finnish federations have increased the number of players they have delivered to the N.H.L.

In 2009-10, the season that John Carlson’s overtime goal in Saskatoon gave the United States a 6-5 win over Canada in the final, 22 percent of N.H.L. players (212) hailed from the United States, while 4 percent (38) came from Finland, according to Quant Hockey.

This season, the N.H.L. is up to 240 American players (26.8 percent) and 49 Finns (5.5 percent). With Finland’s Mikko Rantanen and the Americans Johnny Gaudreau and Patrick Kane among the league’s top scorers, it is not surprising to see that the number of points produced by players from the two nations also has increased — to 26.2 percent from 19.4 in 2009-10 for Americans and to 5.7 percent from 3.8 for Finns.

Jack Hughes, 17, a forward on this year’s American team, is expected to be the No. 1 pick in the N.H.L. draft in June. Kaapo Kakko, 17, who scored the gold medal-winning goal with 1 minute 26 seconds left Saturday, and his teammate Anttoni Honka will be looking to follow in the footsteps of Patrik Laine of the Winnipeg Jets, Jesse Puljujarvi of the Edmonton Oilers and Olli Juolevi of the Vancouver Canucks from Finland’s gold-winning team in 2016; all were selected in the top five at that year’s N.H.L. draft. (A Canadian player has not been chosen No. 1 over all since Connor McDavid in 2015.)

Hockey Canada’s chief executive, Tom Renney, said he recognized the value of increased parity.

“I think if we want this game to be global, we have to recognize it has arrived — that other federations can compete and compete very well,” he said. “I think it’s healthy.”

He added: “You can look at any number of games that we’ve had up to this point in time and recognize that it’s millimeters or milliseconds that can change the outcome of the game. That is certainly fan-friendly, and in my mind, it encourages children to play.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Dan Bilefsky

MONTREAL — In recent weeks, some viewers of “Hockey Night in Canada” have been jolted by the sight of a distinctive red chrysanthemum logo conspicuously displayed during the broadcast of a sports program as quintessentially Canadian as the national game itself.

It is the logo for Huawei, the Chinese telecommunications giant whose chief financial officer, Meng Wanzhou, is out on bail in Vancouver, with a GPS tracking device around her ankle, as she awaits possible extradition to the United States to face fraud charges.

Advertising on “Hockey Night” is just one example of the expanding footprint of Huawei in Canada, where it has invested a total of $500 million in research and development, including into 5G technology at leading Canadian universities.

It also has research facilities in Ottawa, Waterloo, Montreal, and Vancouver; is providing high-speed internet to remote areas of the country; and employs about 1,100 people in Canada.

Now, the company finds itself at the center of a rift in Chinese-Canadian relations caused by Ms. Meng’s case, which includes charges of evading United States economic sanctions on Iran. Following her arrest, China detained several Canadians and sentenced a Canadian drug smuggler to death, in what many here viewed as retaliation. If Canada decides to extradite her, which legal experts say is likely, there are concerns of significant reprisals.

Even before Ms. Meng’s arrest, which has incensed China, some experts were warning that Huawei’s growing presence in Canada could undermine the country’s economic interests and security.

Her case has only intensified those worries.

Canadians should take notice that “a company that is invested hugely in Canada is facing serious allegations of fraud,” said David Mulroney, Canada’s ambassador to China from 2009 to 2012.

He noted that Huawei had been adept in its approach to the Canadian market, using savvy marketing techniques.

“The message that Huawei is on your side in hockey is very shrewd,” Mr. Mulroney said, referring to the “Hockey Night” sponsorship. “Hockey is as close to the Canadian psyche as you can get.”

Huawei’s attempt to woo Canadians comes as Canada’s security agencies are undertaking a national security review of whether Huawei technology should be allowed in Canada’s nascent 5G telecommunications network. That review will determine if Canada will accede to pressure from the United States to ban Huawei products from its 5G wireless networks amid concerns they could be used by the Chinese government for espionage.

[Want more Canadian coverage in your inbox? Sign up for our weekly Canada Letter newsletter.]

Australia and New Zealand have already followed the United States by blocking Huawei from supplying technology for 5G infrastructure.

Scott Bardsley, a spokesman for the Canadian public safety minister, Ralph Goodale, declined to comment specifically on Huawei, but said the government was carefully assessing the security challenges and potential threats of 5G technology.

“We will ensure that our networks are kept safe for Canadians,” he said.

Some experts argue against what they say is American demonizing of Huawei and say the Chinese company owes its success in Canada to making reasonably priced, good quality products consumers like to buy.

But former government officials have expressed concern.

Richard Fadden, a former director of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, who also was a national security adviser to two prime ministers, said Huawei represented a clear cybersecurity threat to Canada since Chinese companies like Huawei were required, by law, to respond to directions from the Chinese state, which collects intellectual property and intelligence from Western countries, including Canada.

“I would counsel the government to forbid the use of Huawei equipment in the development of our 5G network,” Mr. Fadden wrote in an email.

He added that any controls or firewalls that worked today would eventually be overcome by China’s “very sophisticated and ingenious security agencies.”

At a news conference last week in Toronto, Huawei’s chairman, Liang Hua, insisted the company posed no threat. “On issues of cybersecurity, Huawei would never do anything to harm any country, any organization or any individual,” Mr. Liang said.

He said there was no law in China requiring companies “to install back doors or collect foreign intelligence.”

He added that if Huawei ever received such a request from the Chinese state, it would not execute it because the law does not require it to do so.

Sitting in front of a sign with the words “10 Years” — representing Huawei’s decade of doing business in Canada — superimposed on a red Canadian maple leaf, Mr. Liang expressed Huawei’s continued commitment to Canada and praised the country as “an open and inclusive place.”

He also commented on Ms. Meng’s case.

“I hope that the Canadian legal system could bring justice back to her,” he said, adding that the American pressure on its allies over Huawei had provided “a free round of advertisement for the company.”

Perhaps nowhere has Huawei’s influence in Canada been more present than in research and development, including at leading Canadian academic institutions, where it has made big investments in research.

These investments have generated alarm that, in return for money, cash-strapped Canadian universities are relinquishing control to Huawei of intellectual property related to 5G, while making themselves vulnerable to infiltration by China’s security apparatus.

Christian Chua, president of research at Huawei Canada, told reporters last week at the news conference that Huawei shared its intellectual property with the Canadian universities with which it partnered.

Wesley Wark, an intelligence expert at the University of Ottawa, noted that universities were typically not vigilant when it came to security issues.

He added, however, that the current “scaremongering” about Huawei was misplaced given that both China and Huawei had too much to lose if they spied on the West and lost access to those markets.

Nevertheless, concerns that Huawei’s products and infrastructure, including smartphones or cellular base stations, could be used by Chinese intelligence services have been swirling on some Canadian college campuses, including McGill University in Montreal.

In December, Canadian Security Intelligence Service officials briefed about 15 researchers there who receive funding from Huawei about national security risks.

According to Vincent Allaire, a spokesman for McGill, the spy agency warned the researchers, among other things, that the technology they were working on in partnership with Huawei included “dual-use technology” that could potentially be used for military purposes.

Officials at other universities disputed there were any major risks involved in the research partnerships.

John-Paul Heale, who oversees company-sponsored research at the University of British Columbia, said Huawei had contributed about $8 million for 14 research projects over three years.

He stressed that the university could not become an outpost for secret research on behalf of the Chinese state because all research was required to be published in peer-reviewed journals.

“Our research is not happening in the shadows,” he said.

While Huawei’s business has been curtailed in the United States amid spying fears, the company is banking on the fact that in Canada, the desire for reasonably priced smartphones and high-speed internet is what ultimately matters to consumers.

That appears to be the case in Lac La Hache, British Columbia, population 258, a rural community about 300 miles from Vancouver, where Huawei has partnered with the internet provider ABC Communications to provide high-speed internet.

Robert Fry, owner of Cariboo Radio station, said he currently has to commute 45 minutes each day to another town that has an internet connection fast enough to operate a web-based radio station.

Thanks to Huawei technology, he said he hopes to be able to work locally and save $20,000 a year.

“There are fears that China is corrupt and watching what we do and some people are scared they could spy on us,” he said. “But I’m not worried about that. What matters to me is getting high-speed internet.”

Lindsey Wiebe contributed reporting from Toronto.







Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Katelyn Autumn Yannie and Alex Robert Lichorat were married April 15. Laura E. Beachy, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the occasion, officiated at Merriman’s, a restaurant in Kapalua, Hawaii, on the island of Maui.

Mrs. Lichorat, 28, is a regional media relations manager in Manhattan for Macy’s. She graduated from Syracuse University.

She is the daughter of Elizabeth A. Yannie and L. James Yannie II of West Grove, Pa. The bride’s father is the owner of Outside Unlimited, a commercial landscaping business in West Grove. Her mother retired as a test analyst in King of Prussia, Pa., for SunGard, a software and services provider.

Mr. Lichorat, 31, is a biology teacher at Advanced Math and Science, a New Visions Charter High School in the Bronx. He graduated from the SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry and received a master’s degree in secondary science education from Syracuse.

He is the son of Catherine L. Lichorat and Robert M. Lichorat of Westfield, N.Y. The groom’s mother retired as a mathematics teacher at Dunkirk Middle School in Dunkirk, N.Y. His father retired as a wildlife technician in the Falconer, N.Y., office of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.

The couple met in 2009 while both were working at Syracuse’s Tennity Ice Skating Pavilion. She gave skating lessons to children, and he was a rink supervisor, teaching children how to play hockey, driving the Zamboni and performing various other roles at the rink. The two stayed in touch after leaving those jobs, and, in 2013, they began dating.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Annie Karni

WASHINGTON — A day after President Trump reveled in the apparent fizzling of a two-year effort to prosecute him for possible illicit coordination with Russia during the 2016 campaign, Washington’s most prominent Moscow native arrived at the White House on Monday to celebrate.

The milestone? A hockey championship.

Some members of the Washington Capitals, who won their first Stanley Cup title in June, boycotted the White House event in their honor, which included a private tour and a meeting with the president in the Oval Office. But not Alex Ovechkin, the team’s Russian captain and the National Hockey League’s most valuable player, who is also a vocal admirer and personal friend of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.

Mr. Ovechkin was not the only Russian player in the Oval Office on Monday. He was joined there by two teammates: Evgeny Kuznetsov, a forward, and Dmitry Orlov, a defenseman, who were part of a 55-member Capitals delegation, the first from a Washington team to visit the White House since the Washington Redskins won the Super Bowl in 1992.

“You’re champions,” Mr. Trump told them, after reading out Mr. Ovechkin’s statistics for the season “You have a champion’s heart.”

Braden Holtby, the Capitals goalie and an outspoken gay rights advocate, declined to visit the White House. “I’ve got to stay true to my values, and I’m going to respectfully decline,” Mr. Holtby told reporters last week. Two other members of the championship team, Brett Connolly and Devante Smith-Pelly, also said they would not attend.

The irony of the photo-op, in which Mr. Ovechkin stood smiling behind the Resolute Desk next to Mr. Trump, wearing a red tie that matched the president’s signature look, wasn’t lost on some former White House officials.

“Perhaps the only time Russians have visited the Trump White House with bipartisan support in D.C.,” said Andy Hemming, a former White House staff member.

Another former aide pointed out that the White House was a natural place for the Stanley Cup to visit, after Mr. Ovechkin took the trophy on a tour of Moscow’s Red Square last summer.

Mr. Ovechkin has said he is an apolitical sports star. But questions about his connections to Mr. Putin, and whether he is a participant, knowingly or unknowingly, in a Kremlin propaganda machine, have swirled around his career. They peaked when Mr. Ovechkin announced last year the creation of a “civic movement” that he branded online as #putinteam, ahead of Russia’s elections.

Mr. Ovechkin, who received a wedding gift from Mr. Putin and reportedly has his personal phone number, insisted that the hashtag and the campaign were simply his own project, involving no input or signoff from Mr. Putin’s government. There were questions, however, about whether a public relations firm with Kremlin connections was involved.

The three Russians on the Capitals have said their concern is providing entertainment and escape, not influencing global leaders. “A real sport, like art, always brings people together,” Mr. Kuznetsov said in a recent interview with the Russian news media. “And the better we play, the more people will get away from political and other news.”

But the optics of Monday afternoon’s event recalled another Oval Office meeting Mr. Trump took with Russians, in May 2017. At that meeting Mr. Trump told Sergey V. Lavrov, the foreign minister, and Sergey I. Kislyak, then the Russian ambassador to the United States, that firing the F.B.I. director at the time, James B. Comey, took “great pressure” off him.

That conversation reinforced the belief that Mr. Trump had fired Mr. Comey because of the F.B.I.’s investigation into possible collusion between Russian operatives and the campaign — a move that would have potentially implicated him in another crime, obstruction of justice.

But as the Capitals players balanced the Stanley Cup on the Resolute Desk, another “great pressure” seemed to have been relieved. On Friday, the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, concluded his two-year investigation, and in a four-page letter to congressional leaders released on Sunday night, William P. Barr, the attorney general, said the investigation had ended without finding any collusion with the Russians.

Mr. Ovechkin thanked the president for hosting his team and promised to try to win the Stanley Cup again this season.





Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Richard Sandomir

Ira Gitler, who was one of the most respected and prolific jazz writers of the postwar era and an early champion of bebop, died on Saturday in Manhattan. He was 90.

His son, Fitz, confirmed the death, at a nursing facility.

Mr. Gitler’s criticism appeared regularly in publications like DownBeat and JazzTimes. He wrote two books about bebop, the challenging form of modern jazz that emerged in the 1940s. And, along with Leonard Feather and Nat Hentoff, he was among the most prodigious writers of liner notes, annotating more than 700 albums.

In 2017 he was named a Jazz Master by the National Endowment for the Arts.

“He had a terrific ear, and could not be fooled by reputation, no matter how,” the jazz writer Gary Giddins said in an email. “Musicians respected him; they considered him one of the tribe. You can’t say that about a lot of critics.”

Mr. Gitler’s immersion in modern jazz led him to a job with the jazz label Prestige Records in 1950. He packed and unpacked 78s, did promotional work and swept the floors. More important, he wrote his first liner notes, in 1951, for “Swingin’ With Zoot Sims,” and later that year produced his first recording session, for the saxophonist Sonny Rollins.

In 1953, he produced a memorable session with Miles Davis on trumpet and Charlie Parker and Mr. Rollins on saxophones. It was, he recalled, a difficult afternoon: Davis was late and, while the group waited, Parker drank nearly a bottle of gin in two large gulps and dozed off. After Davis’s arrival, Mr. Gitler told him, in profane terms, that he was not playing well.

“Maybe he wanted to leave — I think he was bluffing — but he started packing up his horn,” Mr. Gitler said in a 2009 video interview with the filmmaker Bret Primack. “I said I didn’t mean anything, that I was trying to get him going.”

Davis stayed, and the session proceeded. They recorded three songs, finishing with the Thelonious Monk ballad  “ ’Round Midnight,” which Mr. Gitler felt would be less taxing on Davis.

“It turned out to be kind of somber,” Mr. Gitler said. “It had the feeling of that day, and to me it was a masterpiece.” The tune became a staple of Davis’s repertoire.

Mr. Gitler, an amateur saxophonist, called Prestige his finishing school, and his experience there informed the rest of his career. His knowledge of jazz — acquired by going to nightclubs, attending recording sessions and hanging out with musicians — made him an erudite figure in the field. He was an early supporter of musicians like the tenor saxophonist Dexter Gordon, who spent many years in Europe and out of the American limelight before experiencing a career resurgence in the 1970s.

Mr. Gitler was born on Dec. 18, 1928, in Brooklyn to parents who had immigrated from Russia. His father, Samuel, was a furrier, and his mother, Frances (Goldberg) Gitler, was a homemaker.

At age 5, Ira started taking piano lessons; soon after, he was introduced to swing music by his brother, Monroe, who was 12 years older. Together they listened to big bands on the radio and to records by Count Basie and Benny Goodman. In 1940, Ira tagged along with his brother and a date to see Jimmie Lunceford and his band at the Strand Theater in Brooklyn.

As a teenager, he traveled to nightclubs in Manhattan and first heard bebop live. Writing in 1946 for the Columbia Grammar School newspaper, he reviewed the trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie’s electric performance at the Spotlite Club on West 52nd Street. He later recalled their brief first meeting.

“When Dizzy passed my table after his set,” he wrote, “I greeted him familiarly (even though I had never been in his presence) and asked him when he was going to record again. ‘We recorded today,’ he answered with a twinkle in his high-pitched, slightly sandpapery voice.”

While attending the University of Missouri, Mr. Gitler spent time in jazz clubs in St. Louis, Kansas City, Mo., and Chicago and, during summer vacations, on 52nd Street and in Harlem. He dropped out of college before graduating and joined Prestige.

In the mid-1950s he left the label to pursue freelance writing — the only jobs he held after that were two stints as an editor at DownBeat, between 1963 and 1970 — and quickly distinguished himself. In his notes for John Coltrane’s album “Soultrane” (1958), Mr. Gitler coined the enduring phrase “sheets of sound” to describe that saxophonist’s intense arpeggio runs.

“The image I had in my head,” Mr. Gitler told the website All About Jazz in 2009, “were bolts of cloth undulating as they unfurled. Coltrane never said anything about the term. He never referred to it when I saw him, and I didn’t ask him about it.”

Mr. Giddins said that Mr. Gitler’s liner notes had helped cement his reputation. “Those notes are as much a part of those albums as the sequencing of tracks and the cover art,” he said.

Mr. Gitler had a close association with Mr. Feather, the longtime jazz critic for The Los Angeles Times. He was an assistant on Mr. Feather’s “The New Encyclopedia of Jazz” (1960), and he completed “The Biographical Encyclopedia of Jazz” (1999) after Mr. Feather’s death in 1994 and was credited as co-author.

On his own, Mr. Gitler wrote “Jazz Masters of the 40s” (1966) and “Swing to Bop: An Oral History of the Transition in Jazz in the 1940s” (1985).

As passionate as Mr. Gitler was about jazz, he was equally passionate about another pursuit: ice hockey. He played for and coached an amateur-league team, Gitler’s Gorillas, and wrote “Blood on the Ice: Hockey’s Most Violent Moments” (1974). He also wrote for the program sold to fans at Ranger games at Madison Square Garden.

Stan Fischler, a longtime hockey writer and commentator and a friend of Mr. Gitler’s, recalled on Twitter that a high point of Mr. Gitler’s avocation was playing defense on a fantasy hockey team in 1984 in Lake Placid, N.Y., with the Hall of Famers Gordie Howe and Bill Gadsby.

Mr. Fischler wrote that Gadsby, also a defenseman, was worried that Mr. Gitler would not be able to help hold their team’s one-goal lead when he skated onto the ice in the final minute of the game. “As Bill skated past Ira,” he wrote, “Gadsby stopped, leaned over and uttered the deathless words: ‘Ira, just get in the way!’ ” The lead held.

In addition to his son, Mr. Gitler is survived by his wife, Mary Jo (Schwalbach) Gitler, an artist, and two grandchildren.

For all the musicians Mr. Gitler wrote about, Parker and Gillespie made the strongest impressions on him.

“He said that Bird was one half of his heart,” Fitz Gitler said in an interview, “and Dizzy was the other half.”

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Melina Delkic and Marcus Payadue

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) 

Good evening. Here’s the latest.

1. A portrait of the White House’s culture of dishonesty emerged from the special counsel’s 448-page report that was released Thursday.

At one juncture after another, President Trump made his troubles worse, giving in to anger and grievance and lashing out in ways that turned advisers into witnesses against him. Above, the president on Thursday.

Our reporters spoke with Americans across the country, many of whom agree on one thing: They are disgusted with the country’s leaders and the breakdown of functional government.

What’s next? Robert Mueller, the special counsel, has been asked to testify before the House Judiciary Committee by May 23. Read our profile of the mysterious figure behind the investigation, including his weekly Friday-night ritual of dining at a dimly lit, mostly empty restaurant near his home. He usually ordered white wine and scallops.

_____

2. In other Washington news:

House Democrats issued a subpoena for the unredacted report and all of its underlying evidence, escalating a fight with the attorney general over what material Congress is entitled to see. Above, Representative Jerrold Nadler, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee.

Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary,  defended her statement that “countless” F.B.I. employees had lost faith in James Comey, the F.B.I. director fired by Mr. Trump. She told investigators for the special counsel last summer that it was a “slip of the tongue.”

_____

3. The architect who oversaw the design of the Notre-Dame cathedral’s fire safety system acknowledged that officials had miscalculated how quickly fire could spread through the cathedral.

Benjamin Mouton, the architect, told The Times he was “stunned” by the speed. Fire safety experts said he should have known better.

The fire alarms in the attic of Notre Dame did not immediately notify fire dispatchers. Instead, a guard at the cathedral first had to climb a steep set of stairs to the attic — a trip that would take a “fit” person six minutes to complete, Mr. Mouton said.

Even a flawless response would have a built-in delay of about 20 minutes from the moment the alarm sounded until firefighters could arrive.

_____

4. In other international news:

A journalist in Northern Ireland, Lyra McKee, above, was killed while covering a night of violent unrest in Londonderry. Police blamed militants opposed to British rule there, and said they were treating it as a terrorist episode.

Less than 1 percent of England’s population — including aristocrats, royals and wealthy investors — owns about half of the land, according to an upcoming book.

We also looked at the gaps in international law regarding cruise ships. A recent reported sexual assault case aboard a Mediterranean cruise ship highlighted that legal ambiguity when a Spanish judge released the detained suspect, saying Spain had no jurisdiction.

_____

5. Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., a rising star in the 2020 Democratic field, above, fired his city’s first black police chief in 2012.

In the years that followed, the move unleashed a blizzard of claims, counterclaims and lawsuits.

Why? There were allegations that the police chief, Darryl Boykins, had improperly taped phone calls of senior white officers who were said to have used racist language, including about him. The F.B.I. was investigating Mr. Boykins for it.

Some are now scrutinizing Mr. Buttigieg’s commitment to black voters. He has said he can’t release the tapes because of federal and state wiretapping laws and an ongoing lawsuit.

In other 2020 news, Senator Elizabeth Warren called for the House of Representatives to begin impeachment proceedings against President Trump.

_____

6. A right-wing militia in southern New Mexico, above, is stopping families and detaining them at gunpoint before handing them over to Border Patrol agents.

The act is raising tension over the tactics of armed vigilantes along the border between the U.S. and Mexico. Human rights groups compared it to kidnapping, and the state’s attorney general said the group should “not attempt to exercise authority reserved for law enforcement.”

In a video uploaded by the militia group, a group of migrants can be seen kneeling on the ground and embracing one another.

_____

7. A video of a black Columbia University student being pinned down by security officers is becoming a flashpoint for racism on campus.

Alexander McNab, the student, above, said he had grown tired of being asked to show identification when other students weren’t. After he refused, he was forcibly pinned down by public safety officers.

“What I realized,” he said, “is every time I show my I.D. when I’m asked, the conversation about this remains silent.”

_____

8. There are 311 female ice hockey players in India, which has only five indoor rinks and a sports culture dominated by cricket and field hockey.

We talked to the national women’s ice hockey team of India, above, which relies on outside organizations and crowdsourcing for equipment and funding. The players dream of playing in the Olympics, even though it is a long way off.

“Even our families are like, ‘What are you doing? Get a job,’” said Diskit Angmo, a 22-year-old player. “Sometimes I get frustrated, sometimes I’m like, ‘What the hell?’ But then the passion comes up.”

_____

9. The Bauhaus school, which is celebrating its 100th anniversary, changed everything from furniture to graphic design. But the Bauhaus’s biggest legacy is in architecture.

That legacy extends around the globe because the Nazis forced its closure in 1933, scattering Bauhaus teachers, students and aesthetics. We looked at where the school’s legacy stood in Argentina, Nigeria, Israel, Australia, Iraq, the United States and India. Above, Obafemi Awolowo University in Nigeria, built by an architect who studied at the school.

To further inspire you, we asked a few of our favorite artists to select the five minutes of music that will make you fall in love with classical piano. Take a listen.

_____

10. Finally, baby fever.

Prince Harry and Meghan Markle, pictured above in March, are already bucking some of the centuries-old traditions around the royal baby. We looked at 100 years of photos from our archive that featured royal baby traditions.

We also looked at the economy around the child, who is already inspiring wagers, luxury cookie tins and diamond-encrusted jars of diaper rash cream. And we covered the rise of those doing stand-up comedy while pregnant.

Have a sweet weekend.

_____

Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.

And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning.

Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.

What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

Word of the Day

By The Learning Network

adjective: harshly ironic or sinister

adjective: of a substance, especially a strong acid, capable of destroying or eating away by chemical action

noun: a substance used to treat leather or other materials before dyeing; aids in dyeing process

_________

The word mordant has appeared in 55 articles on NYTimes.com in the past year, including on Sept. 26 in “For Gavin Newsom, a Stealth Run for California Governor” by Adam Nagourney and Tim Arango:

Mr. Newsom said the outgoing governor had left the state “in better shape than probably any governor in modern times.” But he said that Mr. Brown had given him a somewhat mordant warning as they discussed what was around the corner.

“‘Good luck,’” he quoted Mr. Brown as saying. “’Cause he sees the headwinds, he sees the fixed costs, he sees the hockey stick of health care and pensions. He sees all this building pressure, he knows what the Legislature is revving up to do and all these interest groups that are a deeper part of that appetite than the Legislature. They are all expecting the next governor to solve their problems.”

_________

The Word of the Day and the quiz question have been provided by Vocabulary.com. Learn more and see usage examples across a range of subjects in the Vocabulary.com Dictionary.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Supported by

By Reuters

(Reuters) - Southampton chairman Ralph Krueger has left the club by mutual consent after five years in the role, the Premier League side said on Friday.

The former German ice hockey international's contract was set to end in June and following recent talks with Southampton shareholders Jisheng Gao and Katharina Liebherr, it was agreed by all parties that the deal would not be renewed.

"Ralph represented our club with honour and integrity, and followed the Southampton way with great passion. We thank him for the foundations he has helped to build and wish him well for the future," Chinese businessman Gao said in a statement.

Liebherr said Canadian-born Krueger, 59, had laid the foundations for Southampton to be a sustainable team that put pressure on the top sides in the Premier League.

"He was a true leader who fully embodied the Southampton way, a culture which will live on strongly beyond his time as chairman," Liebherr added.

Krueger's departure comes nearly four months after vice-chairman Les Reed left the club to become the English Football Association's new technical director succeeding Dan Ashworth.

"Everything has a beginning and everything has an end. It's the journey in-between that I'll treasure. Thank you Southampton Football Club for the journey," Krueger said.

Former NHL coach Krueger's tenure at the south coast club has not entirely been smooth, as he oversaw the appointment of five different full-time managers with current boss Ralph Hasenhuttl being the latest in December.

Southampton also narrowly missed out on silverware in 2017 when they were beaten 3-2 by Manchester United in the League Cup final. They then just managed to avoid relegation last season.

Saints, who are 17th in the table with 33 points from 32 games, said they would provide more information about their future leadership structure at the end of the season.

 (Reporting by Shrivathsa Sridhar in Bengaluru; Editing by Christian Radnedge)

Advertisement

What photographers across North America’s frigid midsection are seeing this week.

CreditCreditJenn Ackerman for The New York Times

Supported by

By The New York Times

Arctic cold continued to cripple the Midwest and Northeast on Thursday. Photographers captured the effects of extreme winter weather this week. 

[Read: Polar Vortex Updates: Bitter Cold Weather Spreads East]

In Minneapolis, where the wind chill was minus 38 degrees Fahrenheit, Bonnie Star went on her daily walk and had encountered another person.

Along the shore of Lake Michigan in Milwaukee, Wis., temperatures were well below zero and wind chill readings fell to minus 50 degrees.

As New York City firefighters worked to put out a five-alarm fire in Brooklyn, buildings in the area became covered with ice.

An emergency shelter opened in Kalamazoo, Mich., for residents seeking refuge from the cold.

Sea smoke rose from Lake Michigan in Chicago, caused by extremely cold air blowing over warmer water.

Snow continued to come down in Buffalo on Thursday, where more than 13 inches had fallen the day before.

Children in Rochester, Minn., took part in an attempt to set a record for the coldest hockey game ever played. 

Advertisement

